A WARHAMMER 40,000 NOVEL
GHOSTMAKER
Gaunt’s Ghosts - 02
IT IS THE 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor has sat immobile on the Golden
Throne of Earth. He is the master of mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might of
his inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with power from the Dark Age of Technology. He
is the Carrion Lord of the Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he may never truly
die.
YET EVEN IN his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the
daemon-infested miasma of the warp, the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the
psychic manifestation of the Emperor's will. Vast armies give battle in his name on uncounted worlds. Greatest
amongst his soldiers are the Adeptus Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades in
arms are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the
tech-priests of the Adeptus Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely enough to
hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants - and worse.
TO BE A man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live in the cruellest and most bloody
regime imaginable. These are the tales of those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and understanding, for in the grim dark future
there is only war. There is no peace amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter of
thirsting gods.
Inheriting command of the Sabbat Worlds Crusade force from the late and lauded Warmaster Slaydo, Warmaster
Macaroth renewed the Imperial offensive to liberate the Sabbat Worlds, a cluster of nearly one hundred inhabited
systems along the edge of the Segmentum Pacificus.
“Many legendary actions distinguished that twenty year campaign, and many legends were made: the last
stand of the Latarii Gundogs at Lamicia, the Iron Snakes’ victories at Presarius, Ambold Eleven and Fornax
Aleph, and the dogged prosecution of the enemy by the so-called Ghosts of Tanith on Canemara, Spurtis Elipse,
Menezoid Epsilon and Monthax. Of these, perhaps Monthax presents the most intriguing question for Imperial
historians. Ostensibly a head-on confrontation with the forces of Chaos, this action is clouded in mystery and the
details are still sequestered in the archives of Imperial High Command. Only speculation remains as to what
truly occurred on the tangled shores of that hideous battle site.”
- from A History of the Later Imperial Crusades
It was summer here, apparently.
Intermittent but heavy rain sluiced the Imperium lines from a sky wrinkled with grey cloud cover. Barbed, twisted
root-plants with florid, heavy leaves groped their way out of every inch of muddy land and poked from the
shimmering waterbeds too. As land went, most of it had gone. Lagoons and long pools of sheened water forked
through the groves of undergrowth, home to billowing micro-flies and unseen, chirruping insects.
There was a smell in the air, a smell like rank sweat. The smell didn’t surprise Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt.
What did surprise him was that it wasn’t coming from his men. It was exuding from the water, the plants, the mud.
Monthax reeked of corruption and rot.
There was no digging-in on Monthax. Trenches were raised abutments of imported flak-board and locally cut
timber. Levees and sand-bagged walls had been dug out and raised by the Ghosts. For three days, since the dropships
landed them, there had been no other sound except the squelch of entrenching tools as work parties filled
plastic sacks. No other sound except the chirrup of a billion insects.
Seeping sweat into his freshly-donned tunic from the moment he had it on, Gaunt emerged from his command shed,
a three chamber modular habitat staked up on girder poles out of the soupy water. He put his commissar’s cap
squarely on his head, knowing full well that it would make sweat run into his eyes. He wore high boots, breeches
and a tunic shirt, carrying his weatherproof overcoat over his shoulders. It was too hot to wear it, too wet to go
without.
Ibram Gaunt stepped down off the shed steps and his feet settled in satin-skinned water twenty centimetres deep.
He paused. The oily ripples ebbed away and he looked down at himself. A reflected Gaunt lay horizontal in the rank
water at his feet. Tall, lean, with a sculpted, high-cheeked face that ironically mocked his name.
He looked away, up, through the fleshy leaves of the thickets and the coiled low cover of the plant growth. On the
horizon, partly screened by sweating mist, firepower roared back and forth as Imperial gunnery duelled with the
heavy artillery of Chaos.
He strode forward through the slushy water, up through the dry land of an islet thick with tendrils and overhanging
flowers, and along a duck-board walkway towards the lines.
Behind a long, meandering, S-shaped embankment levee three kilometres long, the Tanith First-and-Only stood
ready. They had raised this dyke themselves, armouring it with rapidly decaying planks of flak-board. Artificial
mounds had been dug behind the defence to keep ammo piles out of the water. His men stood ready in fire-teams,
fifteen hundred strong, dressed in the black capes and dull body-armour uniform that was their signature. Some stood
at eyeholes in the dyke, guns fixed. Others manned heavy weapon nests. Others stood and smoked and chatted and
speculated. All stood in at least fifteen centimetres of murky slime.
The bivouacs, also raised on girder legs out of the swamp, were set back from the dyke line by about thirty metres.
Little sanctuaries of dryness lifted out of the ooze.
Gaunt wandered along the dyke to the first group of men, who were digging up a footstep by the dyke wall from
mud spaded out of the waterline.
Whooping birds swung overhead, large-winged and stark-white with folded, gangly pink legs. The insects
chirruped.
Sweat made half moons in the underarms of his tunic in less than a dozen paces. Flies stung him. All thoughts of
future glory, of the bitter action to come, left Ibram Gaunt’s mind. Instead, the echoes came. The memories.
Gaunt cursed quietly, wiped his brow. It was days like this, in the slow, loaded hours while they waited for
combat, that the memories flooded back at their most intense. Of the past, of lost comrades and missed friends, of
glories and defeats long gone, of ends.
And of beginnings…
ONE
GHOSTMAKER
Fire, like a flower. Blossoming. Pale, greenish fire, scuttling like it was alive. Eating the world, the whole
world…
Opening his eyes, Ibram Gaunt, Imperial Commissar, gazed into his own lean, pale face. Trees, as dark green as an
ocean at night, rushed past behind his eyes.
“We’re making the final approach now, sir.”
Gaunt looked round, away from his reflection in the small, thick port of the orbital cutter, and saw his adjutant,
Sym. Sym was an efficient man of middle years, his slightly puffy flesh marked across the throat and cheek by a
livid, ancient burn.
“I said, we’re making the final approach,” Sym repeated.
“I heard you,” Gaunt nodded gently. “Remind me again of the schedule.”
Sym sat back in his padded leather G-chair and perused a data-slate. “Official greeting ceremony. Formal
introductions to the Elector of Tanith and the government assembly. Review of the Founding regiments. And a formal
dinner tonight.”
Gaunt’s gaze drifted back to the vast forests that flew by under the window. He hated the trappings of pomp and
protocol, and Sym knew it.
“Tomorrow, sir, the transfer shifts begin. We’ll have all the regiments aboard and ready to embark before the end
of the week,” the man said, trying to put a more positive spin on things.
Gaunt didn’t look round but said, “See if you can get the transfers to begin directly after the review. Why waste the
rest of today and tonight?”
Sym nodded, thoughtful. “That should be possible.”
A soft chime signalled imminent landfall, and they both felt the sudden pull of deceleration g-forces. The other
passengers in the craft’s long cabin: an astropath, silent in his robes, and officials of the Adeptus Ministorum and the
Departmento Munitorium, began to buckle their harnesses and settle back for landing. Sym found himself looking out
of the port, watching the endless forests that so intrigued Gaunt.
“Strange place this, this Tanith. So they say.” He rubbed his chin. “They say the forests move. Change. The trees
apparently… uhm… shift. According to the pilot, you can get lost in the woods in a matter of minutes.”
Sym’s voice dropped to a whisper. “They say it’s a touch of Chaos! Can you believe that? They say Tanith has a
touch of Chaos, being this close to the Edge, you see.”
Gaunt did not reply.
The spires and towers of Tanith Magna rose to meet the small barbed shape of the cutter. The city, set here amid the
endless oceans of evergreen trees, looked from the air like a complex circle of standing stones, dark grey slabs
raised in a clearing in defiance of the forest around. Banners and brazier smoke fluttered from the higher fortress
walls, and outside the city perimeter, Gaunt could see a vast plain cut from the forest. Row upon row of tents stood
there, thousands of them, each with its own cookfire. The Founding Fields.
Beyond the tent-town, the huge black shadows of the bulk transports, whale-mouths and belly ramps open,
squatting in fire-blackened craters of earth, ready to eat up the men and the machines of the new regiments of Tanith.
His regiments, he reminded himself, the first Imperial Guard regiments to be founded on this enigmatic, sparsely
populated frontier world.
For eight years, Gaunt had served as political officer with the Hyrkan 8th, a brave regiment that he had been with
from its founding on the windy hills of Hyrkan to the ferocious victory of Balhaut. But so many had fallen, and
another founding would fill familiar uniforms with unfamiliar faces. It was time to move on, and Gaunt had felt
grateful to be reassigned. His seniority, his experience… his very notoriety made him an ideal choice to whip the
virgin units of Tanith into shape. Part of him, a young, eager but small part deep inside, relished the prospect of
building a fresh name for the Guard’s roll of honour. But the rest of him was dull, set rigid, empty. More than
anything, he felt he was simply going through the motions.
He had felt that way since Slaydo’s death. The old commander would have wanted him here, wanted him to carry
on to glory… after all, wasn’t that why he’d made his gift? Promoting him there, on the firefields of Balhaut, to
colonel-commissar… making him one of the few political officers in the Guard capable of commanding a regiment.
Such trust, such faith. But Gaunt was so tired. It didn’t seem much like a reward now.
The cutter dipped. Great brass shutters atop one of the city’s largest towers hinged open like an orchid’s petals to
receive it.
On the Founding Fields, the men looked up as the approaching cutter purred overhead, banked against the slow cloud
and settled like a beetle over the city wall towards the landing tower.
“Someone important,” noted Larkin, squinting up at the sky. He spat on the wirecloth in his hand and resumed
polishing his webbing buckles.
“Just more traffic. More pompous off-worlders.” Rawne lay back and turned his face to the sun.
Corbec, stood by his tent, shielded his eyes against the glare and nodded. “I think Larkin’s right. Someone
important. There was a big Guard crest on the flank of that flier. Someone come for the Founding Review. Maybe
this colonel-commissar himself.”
He dropped his gaze and looked about. On either side of him, the rows of three-man tents stretched away in
ordered files, and guardsmen in brand new uniforms sat around, cleaning kit, stripping guns, eating, dicing, smoking,
sleeping. Six thousand men, all told, mostly infantry but some artillery and armoured crews, three whole regiments
and men of Tanith all.
Corbec sat down by his own cook stove and rubbed his hands. His new, black-cloth uniform chafed at the edges of
his big frame. It would be the very devil to wear in. He looked across at his tent-mates, Larkin and Rawne. Larkin
was a slender, whipcord man with a dagger face. Like all the Tanith, he was pale skinned and black haired. Larkin
had dangerous eyes like blue fire, a left ear studded with three silver hoops, and a blue spiral-wyrm tattoo on his
right cheek. Corbec had known him for a good while: they had served together in the same unit of the Tanith Magna
militia before the Founding. He knew Larkin’s strengths — a marksman’s eyes and a brave heart — and his
weaknesses — an unstable character, easily rattled.
Rawne he did not know as well. Rawne was a handsome devil, his clean, sleek features decorated by a tattoo
starburst over one eye. He had been a junior officer in the militia of Tanith Attica, or one of the other southern cities,
but he didn’t talk about it much. Corbec had a bad feeling there was a murderous, ruthless streak under Rawne’s oily
charm.
Bragg — huge, hulking, genial Bragg — shuffled over from his tent, a flask of hot sacra in his hands. “Need
warming up?” he asked and Corbec nodded a smile to the giant man. Bragg poured four cups, and passed one to
Larkin, who barely looked up but muttered thanks, and one to Rawne, who said nothing as he knocked it back.
“You reckon that was our commissar, then?” Bragg said at last, asking the question Corbec knew he had been
dying to get out since overhearing Corbec’s remark.
Corbec sipped and nodded. “Gaunt? Yeah, most like.”
“I heard stuff, from the Munitorium blokes at the transports. They say he’s hard as nails. Got medals too. A real
killer, they say.”
Rawne sniffed. “Why can’t we be led by our own, is what I want to know. A good militia commander’s all we
need.”
“I could offer,” Corbec joked softly.
“He said a good one, dog!” Larkin snapped, returning to his obsessive polishing.
Corbec winked across at Bragg and they sipped some more.
“It seems funny to be going though, dunnit?” Bragg said after a spell. “I mean, for good. Might never be coming
back.”
“Most like,” Corbec said. “That’s the job. To serve the Emperor in his wars, over the stars and far away. Best get
used to the idea.”
“Eyes up!” Forgal called from a tent nearby. “Here comes big Garth with a face on!”
They looked around. Major Garth, their unit commander, was thumping down the tent line issuing quick orders left
and right. Garth was a barrel-chested buttress of a man, whose sloping bulk and heavy, lined features seemed to
suggest that gravity pulled on him harder than most. He drew up to them.
“Pack it up, boys. Time to ship,” he said.
Corbec raised an eyebrow. “I thought that was tomorrow?” he began.
“So did I, so did Colonel Forth, so did the Departmento Munitorium, but it looks like our new colonel-commissar
is an impatient man, so he wants us to start lifting to the troop-ships right after the Review.”
Garth passed on, shouting more instructions.
“Well,” Colm Corbec said to no one in particular, “I guess this is where it all starts.”
Gaunt’s head ached. He wasn’t sure if it was the interminable introductions to Tanith dignitaries and politicos, the
endless small talk, the achingly slow review of the troops out on the marshalling yard in front of the Tanith
Assembly, or simply the bloody pipe music that seemed to be playing in every damn chamber, street and courtyard of
the city that he walked into.
And the troops hadn’t been that impressive either. Pale, dark-haired, undernourished-looking somehow, haggard in
plain black fatigues, each with a piebald camo-cloak swept over the shoulder opposite the one to which their lasgun
was slung. Not to mention the damn earstuds and hoops, the facial tattoos, the unkempt hair, the lilting, sing-song
accents. The “glorious 1st, 2nd and 3rd of Tanith”, the new regiments; a scrawny, scruffy mob of soft-voiced
woodsmen indeed, and nothing to write home about.
The Elector of Tanith, the local planetary lord, himself sporting a cheek tattoo of a snake, had assured Gaunt of the
fighting mettle of the Tanith militia.
“They are resolute and cunning,” the Elector had said as they stood on the terrace overlooking the massed ranks.
“Tanith breeds indefatigable men. And our particular strengths are in scouting and stealth. As you might expect on a
world whose moving forests blur the topography with bewildering speed, the Tanith have an unerring sense of place
and direction. They do not get lost. They perceive what others miss.”
“In the main, I need fighters, not guides,” Gaunt had said, trying not to sound too snide.
The Elector had merely smiled. “Oh, we fight too. And now for the first time we are honoured to be adding our
fighting spirit to that of the Imperium. The regiments of Tanith will serve you well, colonel-commissar.”
Gaunt had nodded politely.
Now Gaunt sat in private in an anteroom of the Assembly. He’d slung his greatcoat and his cap on a hardwood
chest nearby and Sym had laid out his dress jacket for the dinner that would commence in thirty minutes. If only he
could rid himself of his headache and of the bad taste in his throat that he had landed a weak command.
And the music! The damn pipe music, invading his head even here in the private rooms!
He got to his feet and strode to the sloping windows. Out beyond the cityscape and the Founding Fields, orange
fire thumped into the twilight as the heavy transports departed and returned, ferrying the regimental components to
the vast troop carriers in high orbit.
That music still!
Gaunt walked to a set of dark green velvet drapes and swept them aside. The music stopped. The boy with the
small set of pipes looked at his raging eyes in astonishment.
“What are you doing?” Gaunt asked, as threatening as a drawn knife.
“Playing, sir,” the boy said. He was about seventeen, not yet a man, but tall and well-made. His face, a blue fish
tattoo over the left eye, was strong and handsome. His be-ringed fingers clutched a Tanith pipe, a spidery clutch of
reeds attached to a small bellows bag that was rhythmically squeezed under the arm.
“Was this your idea?” Gaunt asked.
The boy shook his head. “It’s tradition. For every visitor, the pipes of Tanith will play, wherever they go, to lead
them back through the forest safely.”
“I’m not in the forest, so shut up!” Gaunt paused. He turned back to the boy. “I respect the traditions and customs
of the Tanith, but I… I have a headache.”
“I’ll stop then,” the boy said. “I — I’ll wait outside. The Elector told me to attend on you and pipe you while you
were here. I’ll be outside if you need me.”
Gaunt nodded. On his way out of the door, the boy collided with Sym, who was on the way in.
“I know, I know…” Gaunt began. “If I don’t hurry, I’ll be late for the dinner and — What? Sym? What is it?”
The look on Sym’s face immediately told Gaunt that something was very, very wrong.
Gaunt gathered his senior staff in a small, wood-panelled lobby off the main banqueting hall. Most were dressed for
the formal function, stiff in gilt collars and cuffs. Junior Munitorium staff watched the doors, politely barring the
entry of any Tanith dignitaries.
“I don’t understand!” said a senior Departmento Munitorium staffer. “The nearest edge of the warzone is meant to
be eighty days from here! How can this be?”
Gaunt was pacing, reviewing a data-slate with fierce intensity. “We broke them at Balhaut, but they splintered.
Deep intelligence and the scout squadrons suggested they were running scared, but it was always possible that some
of their larger components would scatter inwards, looping towards us, rather than running for the back end of the
Sabbat Worlds and away.”
Gaunt wheeled on them and cursed out loud. “In the name of Solan! On his damn deathbed, Slaydo was quite
precise about this! Picket fleets were meant to guard all the warpgates towards territories like Tanith, particularly
when we’re still at founding and vulnerable like this! What does Macaroth think he’s playing at?”
Sym looked up from a flatplan-chart he had unfurled on a desk. “The lord high militant commander has deployed
most of the Crusade Forces in the liberation push. It is clear he is intent on pressing the advantage won by his
predecessor.”
“Balhaut was a significant win…” began one of the Ecclesiarchy.
“It will only stay a victory if we police the won territories correctly. Macaroth has broken the new front by racing
to pursue the foe. And that’s let the foe through, in behind our main army. It’s text book stupidity! The enemy may
even have lured us on!”
“It leaves us wide open,” another Ecclesiarch agreed flatly.
Gaunt nodded. “An hour ago, our ships in orbit detected a massive enemy armada coming in-system. It is no
exaggeration to say that Tanith has just hours of life left to it.”
“We could fight—” someone ventured bravely.
“We have just three regiments. Untried, unproven. We have no defensive position and no prepared emplacements.
Half of our force is already stowed in the troop carriers upstairs and the other half is penned in transit. We couldn’t
turn them around and get them unlimbered and dug in in under two full days. Either way, they are cannon fodder.”
“What do we do?” Sym asked. Some of the others nodded as if urging the same question.
“Our astropaths must send word immediately to the main crusade command, to Macaroth, and tell him of the
insurgency. If nothing else, they need to turn and guard their flank and back. The rest of you: the carrier ships will
leave orbit in one hour or at the point of attack, whichever comes first. Get as much of the remaining disembarked
men and equipment aboard as you can before then. Whatever’s left gets left behind.”
“We’re abandoning Tanith?” a Munitorium aide said, disbelief in his thin voice.
“Tanith is already dead. We can die with it, or we can salvage as many fighting men as we can and re-deploy them
somewhere they will actually do some good. In the Emperor’s name.”
They all looked at him, incredulous, the enormity of his decision sinking in.
“DO IT!” he bawled.
The night sky above Tanith Magna caught fire and fell on the world. The orbital bombardment blew white-hot holes
out of the ancient forests, melted the high walls, splintered the towers, and shattered the paved yards.
Dark shapes moved through the smoke-choked corridors of the Assembly, dark shapes that gibbered and hissed,
clutching chattering, whining implements of death in their stinking paws.
With a brutal cry, Gaunt kicked his way through a burning set of doors and fired his bolt pistol.
He was a tall, powerful shape in the swirling smoke, a striding figure with a long coat sweeping like a cloak from
his broad shoulders. His bright eyes tightened in his lean, grim face and he wheeled and fired again into the gloom.
In the smoke-shadows nearby, red-eyed shapes shrieked and burst, spraying fluid across the stonework.
Las fire cut the air near him. He turned and fired, and then took the staircase at a run, vaulting over the bodies of
the fallen. There was a struggling group up ahead, on the main landing. Two bloodied fighting men of the Tanith
militia, wrestling with Sym at the doors to the launch silos.
“Let us through, you bastard!” Gaunt could hear one of them crying, “You’d leave us here to die! Let us through!”
Gaunt saw the autopistol in the hand of the other too late. It fired the moment before he ploughed into them.
Raging, he broke one’s jaw with the butt of his bolter, knocking the man backwards to the head of the stairs. He
picked up the other and threw him over the stair rail into the smoke below.
Sym lay in a pool of blood.
“I — I’ve signalled… the carrier fleet, as you ordered… for the final withdrawal… Leave me and get aboard the
cutter or—” Sym began.
“Shut up!” Gaunt snapped, trying to lift him, his hand slick with the man’s blood. “We’re both going!”
“T-there’s no time, not for me… just for you! Go, sir!” Sym rasped, his voice high with pain. From the bay
beyond, Gaunt heard the scream of the cutter’s thrusters rising to take-off readiness.
“Damn it, Sym!” Gaunt said. The aide seemed to reach for him, clawing at his tunic. For a second, Gaunt though
Sym was trying to pull himself up so that Gaunt could carry him.
Then Sym’s torso exploded in a red mist and Gaunt was thrown back off his feet.
At the head of the stairs, the grotesque shock troops of Chaos bayed and advanced. Sym had seen them over
Gaunt’s shoulder, had pulled himself up and round to shield Gaunt with his own body.
Gaunt got to his feet. His first shot burst the horned skull of the nearest beast. His second and third tore apart the
body of another. His fourth, fifth and sixth gutted two more and sent them spinning back into their comrades behind
on the steps.
His seventh was a dull clack of dry metal.
Hurling the spent bolter aside, Gaunt backed away towards the silo bay doors. He could smell the rancid scents of
Chaos over the smoke now, and hear the buzz of the maggot-flies. In a second they would be on him.
Autocannon fire blasted into the heathen nightmares, sustained heavy fire from an angle nearby. Gaunt turned, and
saw the boy, the piper with the fish tattoo. He was laying down an arc of covering fire from the portico of the silo
bay with a sentry’s autocannon that he had rested across the stonework. “Get in! The last cutter’s waiting for you!”
cried the boy.
Gaunt threw himself through the bay doors into the fierce whirlwind of the cutter’s engine backwash. The side
hatch was just closing and he scrambled through, losing the tails of his coat to the biting hinge.
Enemy weapons fire resounded off the hull.
Gaunt was face down on the cabin floor, drenched in blood, looking up at the terrified faces of the Munitorium
officials who made up this last evacuation flight to the fleet.
“Open the door again!” he yelled. “Open it again!”
None of them moved to do so. Gaunt hauled himself up and heaved on the hatch lever. The door thumped open and
the boy scrambled inside.
Gaunt dragged him clear of the hatch and yanked it shut. “Now!” he bellowed down the cabin to the pilot’s bay.
“Go now if you’re going!”
The cutter rose from the tower bay hard and fast, lifter jets screaming as they were jammed into overdrive. Aerial
laser fire exploded the brass orchid-shutters around them and clipped a landing stanchion. Hovering, the cutter
wobbled. Below it, Tanith Magna was a blazing inferno.
Forgetting fuel tolerances, flight discipline, even his own mother’s name, the pilot hammered the main thrusters to
maximum and the cutter fired itself up through the black smoke like a bullet.
Left to die, the forests burned.
Gaunt fell against a bulkhead and clawed his way to a porthole. Just like in his dreams — fire, like a flower.
Blossoming. Pale, greenish fire, scuttling like it was alive. Eating the world, the whole world.
Ibram Gaunt gazed into his reflection, his own lean, pale, bloody face. Trees, blazing like the heart of a star,
rushed past behind his eyes.
High over the cold, mauve, marbled world of Nameth, Gaunt’s ships hung like creatures of the deep marine places.
Three great troop carriers, their ash-grey, crenellated hulls vaulted like monstrous cathedrals, and the long, muscular
escort frigate Navarre, spined and blistered with lance weapons and turrets, hooked and angular like a woodwasp,
two kilometres long.
In his stateroom on the Navarre, Gaunt reviewed the latest survey intelligence. Tanith was lost, part of a
conquered wedge of six planet systems that fell to the Chaos armada pincer which Macaroth had allowed to slip
behind his over-eager war-front. Now Crusade forces were doubling back and re-engaging the surprise enemy.
Sporadic reports had come in of a thirty-six hour deep-space engagement of capital ships near the Circudus. The
Imperial Crusaders now faced a war on two fronts.
Gaunt’s ruthless retreat had salvaged three and a half thousand fighting men, just over half of the Tanith regiments,
and most of their equipment. The cruellest, most cynical view could call it a victory of sorts.
Gaunt slid a data-slate out from under a pile of other documents on his desk and eyed it. It was the transcript of the
communiqué from Macaroth himself, applauding Gaunt’s survival instinct and his great feat in salvaging for the
crusade a significant force of men. Macaroth had not seen fit to mention the loss of a planet and its population. He
spoke of “Colonel-Commissar Gaunt’s correct choice, and frank evaluation of an impossible situation”, and ordered
him to a holding position at Nameth to await deployment.
It made Gaunt queasy. He tossed the slate aside.
The shutter opened and Kreff entered. Kreff was the frigate’s executive officer, a hard-faced, shaven-headed man
in the emerald, tailored uniform of the Segmentum Pacificus Fleet. He saluted, a pointless over-formality given that
he had been covering as Gaunt’s adjutant in Sym’s place, and had been in and out of the room ten times an hour since
Gaunt came aboard.
“Anything?” Gaunt asked.
“The astropaths tell us that something may be coming soon. Perhaps our orders. There is a current, a feeling. And
also, uhm…”Kreff was obviously uncomfortable. He didn’t know Gaunt and vice versa. It had taken Sym four years
to get used to the commissar.
Sym…
“What is it?” Gaunt asked.
“I wondered if you would care to discuss our more immediate concern? The morale of the men.”
Gaunt got up. “Okay, Kreff. Speak your mind.”
Kreff hesitated. “I didn’t mean with me. There is a deputation from the troop-ships—”
Gaunt turned hard at this. “A what?”
“A deputation of Tanith. They want to speak to you. They came aboard thirty minutes ago.”
Gaunt took his bolt pistol out of the holster slung over his chair back and checked the magazine. “Is this your
discreet way of announcing a mutiny, Kreff?”
Kreff shook his head and laughed humourlessly. He seemed relieved when Gaunt reholstered his weapon.
“How many?”
“Fifteen. Mostly enlisted men. Few of the officers came out alive.”
“Send three of them in. Just three. They can choose who.”
Gaunt sat down behind his desk again. He thought about putting his cap on, his jacket. He looked across the cabin
and saw his own reflection in the vast bay port. Two metres twenty of solid bone and sinew, the narrow, dangerous
face that so well matched his name, the cropped blond hair. He wore his high-waisted dress breeches with their
leather braces, a sleeveless undershirt and jack boots. His jacket and cap gave him command and authority. Barearmed,
he gave himself physical power.
The shutter clanked and three men entered. Gaunt viewed them without comment. One was tall, taller and older
than Gaunt and built heavily, if a little paunchy. His arms were like hams and were decorated with blue spirals. His
beard was shaggy, and his eyes might once have twinkled. The second was slim and dark, with sinister good looks
that were almost reptilian. He had a blue star tattooed across his right eye. The third was the boy, the piper.
“Let’s know you,” Gaunt said simply.
“I’m Corbec,” said the big man. “This is Rawne.”
The snake nodded.
“And you know the boy.” Corbec said.
“Not his name.”
“Milo,” the boy said clearly. “Brin Milo.”
“I imagine you’re here to tell me that the men of Tanith want me dead,” said Gaunt simply.
“Perfectly true,” Rawne said. Gaunt was impressed. None of them even bothered to acknowledge his rank and
seniority. Not a “sir”, not a “commissar”.
“Do you know why I did what I did?” Gaunt asked. “Do you know why I ordered the regiments off Tanith and left
it to die? Do you know why I refused all your pleas to let you turn and fight?”
“It was our right—” Rawne began.
“Our world died, Colonel-Commissar Gaunt,” Corbec said, the title bringing Gaunt’s head up sharp. “We saw it
flame out from the windows of our transports. You should have let us stand and fight. We would have died for
Tanith.”
“You still can, just somewhere else.” Gaunt got to his feet. “You’re not men of Tanith anymore. You weren’t when
you were camped out on the Founding Fields. You’re Imperial Guard, servants of the Emperor first and nothing else
second.”
He turned to face the window port, his back to them. “I mourn the loss of any world, any life. I did not want to see
Tanith die, nor did I want to abandon it. But my duty is to the Emperor, and the Sabbat Worlds Crusade must be
fought and won for the good of the entire Imperium. The only thing you could have done if I had left you on Tanith
was die. If that’s what you want, I can provide you with many opportunities. What I need is soldiers, not corpses.”
Gaunt gazed out into space. “Use your loss, don’t be crippled by it. Put the pain into your fighting spirit. Think
hard! Most men who join the Guard never see their homes again. You are no different.”
“But most have a home to return to!” Corbec spat.
“Most can look forward to living through a campaign and mustering to settle on some world their leader has
conquered and won. Slaydo made me a gift after Balhaut. He gave me the military rank of colonel and granted me
settlement rights to the first planet I win. Help me by doing your job, and I’ll help you by sharing that with you.”
“Is that a bribe?” Rawne asked.
Gaunt shook his head. “Just a promise. We need each other. I need an able, motivated army, you need something to
take the pain away, something to fight for, something to look forward to.”
Gaunt saw something in the reflection on the glass. He didn’t turn his head. “Is that a laspistol, Rawne? Would you
have come here and murdered me?”
Rawne, grinned. “What makes you put that in the past tense, commissar?”
Gaunt turned. “What do I have here then? A regiment or a mutiny?”
Corbec met his gaze. “The men will need convincing. You’ve made ghosts of them, hollow echoes. We’ll take
word back to the troop-ships of why you did what you did and what the future might hold. Then it’s up to them.”
“They need to rally around their officers.”
Rawne laughed. “There are none! Our command staff were all on the Founding Fields trying to embark the men
when the bombardment started. None of them made it off Tanith alive.”
Gaunt nodded. “But the men elected you to lead the deputation? You’re leaders.”
“Or simply bold and dumb enough to be the ones to front you,” Corbec said.
“It’s the same thing,” Gaunt said. “Colonel Corbec. Major Rawne. You can appoint your own juniors and unit
chiefs and report back to me in six hours with an assessment of morale. I should have our deployment by then.”
They glanced at each other, taken aback.
“Dismissed,” prompted Gaunt.
The trio turned away confused.
“Milo? Wait, please,” Gaunt said. The boy stopped as the shutter closed after the two men. “I owe you,” Gaunt
told him baldly.
“And you paid me back. I’m not militia or Guard. I only got off Tanith alive because you brought me.”
“Because of your service to me.”
Milo paused. “The Elector himself ordered me to stay with you, to see to your needs. I was just doing my duty.”
“Those two brought you along because they thought the sight of you might mollify me, didn’t they?”
“They’re not stupid,” noted Milo.
Gaunt sat back at his desk. “Neither are you. I have need of an adjutant, a personal aide. It’s dogsbody, gopher
work mostly, and the harder stuff you can learn. It would help me to have a Tanith in the post if my working
relationship with them is going to continue.”
Before Milo could answer, the shutter slammed open again and Kreff entered, a slate in his hand. He saluted
again. “We’ve got our orders, sir,” he said.
Distant, rumbling explosions seemed a constant feature of the deadzone on Blackshard. The persistent crump of
heavy gunnery drummed the low, leaden sky over the ridgeline. An earthwork had been built up along the ridge’s
spine and, under hardened bunkers, a detachment of Imperial Guard — six units of the 10th Royal Sloka — were
readying to mobilise.
Colonel Thoren walked the line. The men looked like world-killers in their ornate battledress: crested, enamelled
scarlet and silver warsuits built by the artisans of Sloka to inspire terror in the enemy.
But perhaps not this enemy. General Hadrak’s orders had been precise, but Thoren’s heart was heavy. He had no
relish for the approaching push. He had no doubt at all it would cost him dearly. To push blind, unsupported, into
treacherous unknown territory in the hope of finding a wormhole into the enemy positions that might not even be
there. The prospect made him feel sick.
Thoren’s subaltern drew his attention suddenly to the double file of sixty men moving down the covered transit
trench towards them. Scrawny ruffians, dressed in black, camo-cloaks draped over them, plastered to their bodies by
the rain.
“Who in the name of Balor’s blood…?” Thorne began.
Halting his column, the leader, a huge blackguard with a mess of tangled beard and a tattoo — a tattoo!—marched
up to Thoren and saluted.
“Colonel Corbec, 1st Tanith. First-and-Only. General Hadrak has ordered us forward to assist you.”
“Tanith? Where the hell is that?” asked Thoren.
“It isn’t,” replied the big man genially. “The general said you were set to advance on the enemy positions over the
deadzone. Suggested you might need a covert scouting force seeing as how your boys’ scarlet armour stands out like
a baboon’s arse.”
Thoren felt his face flush. “Now listen to me, you piece—”
A shadow fell across them. “Colonel Thoren, I presume?”
Gaunt dropped down into the dugout from the trench boarding. “My regiment arrived here on Blackshard yesterday
night, with orders to reinforce General Hadrak’s efforts to seize the Chaos stronghold. That presupposes cooperative
efforts between our units.”
Thoren nodded. This was Gaunt, the upstart colonel-commissar, it had to be. He’d heard stories.
“Appraise me, please,” said Gaunt.
Thoren waved up an aide who flipped up a map-projector, and displayed a fuzzy image of the deadzone. “The foe
are dug in deep in the old citadel ruins. The citadel had a sizeable standing defence force, so they’re well equipped.
Chaos cultists, mostly, about seventeen thousand able fighting men. We also…” he paused.
Gaunt raised a questioning eyebrow.
“We believe there may be other abominations in there. Chaos spawn.”
Thoren breathed heavily. “Most of the main fighting is contained in this area here, while artillery duels blight the
other fronts.”
Gaunt nodded. “Most of my strength is deployed along the front line. But General Hadrak also directed us to this
second front.”
Thoren indicated the map again. “The foe are up to more than simply holding us out. They know sooner or later
we’ll break through, so they must be up to something — trying to complete something, perhaps. Recon showed that
this flank of the city might be vulnerable to a smaller force. There are channels and ducts leading in under the old
walls, a rat-maze, really.”
“My boys specialise in rat-mazes,” Gaunt said.
“You want to go in first?” Thoren asked.
“It’s mud and tunnels. The Tanith are light infantry, you’re armoured and heavy. Let us lead through and then
follow us in support when we’ve secured a beachhead. Bring up some support weapons.”
Thoren nodded. “Very well, colonel-commissar.”
Gaunt and Corbec withdrew to their men.
“This will be the first blooding for this regiment, for the Tanith First-and-Only,” began Gaunt.
“For Gaunt’s Ghosts,” someone murmured. Mad Larkin, Corbec was sure.
Gaunt smiled. “Gaunt’s Ghosts. Don’t disappoint me.”
They needed no other instructions. At Corbec’s gesture, they hurried forward in pairs, slipping their camo-cloaks
down as shrouds around them, lasguns held loose and ready. The hybrid weave of the hooded cloaks blurred to
match the dark grey mud of the ridgeway, and each man stooped to smear his cheeks and brow with wet mud before
slipping over the earthwork.
Thoren watched the last one disappear and then span the trench macro-periscope around. He looked out, but of the
sixty plus men who had just passed his position, there was no sign.
“Where in the name of Solan did they go?” he breathed.
Gaunt was amazed. He’d seen them practise and train in the belly holds of the big carrier ships, but now here, in the
wild of a real deadzone, their skills startled him. They were all but invisible in the stinking mire, just tiny blurs of
movement edging between stacks of debris and over mounds of wreckage towards the slumped but massive curtain
walls of the citadel.
He pulled his own Tanith camo-cloak around him. It had been part of his deal with Corbec: he insisted on leading
them in to assure loyalty, they insisted he didn’t give their position away.
The micro-bead in his ear tickled. It was Corbec. “First units at the tunnels now. Move up close in pairs.”
Gaunt touched his throat mike. “Hostiles?” he asked.
“A little light knife work,” crackled the reply.
A few moment later he was entering the dripping, dark mouth of the rubble tunnel. Five Chaos-bred warriors in the
orange robes of their cult lay dead. Before him, the Tanith were forming up. Corbec was wiping blood from the
blade of his long, silver knife.
“Let’s go,” said Gaunt.
The Elector of Tanith, may his soul rest, had not lied about anything, Gaunt decided. The Ghosts had proved their
cunning stealth crossing the open waste of the deadzone, and he had no clue as to how they threaded their way
through the crazy lightless warren of the tunnels so surely. “They do not get lost,” the Elector had boasted, and it was
true. Gaunt suspected that the foe had assumed nothing bigger than a cockroach would ever find its way through those
half-collapsed, deathtrap tunnels.
But Corbec’s men had, effortlessly, in scant minutes. Rising from the tunnels’ ends inside the curtain wall of the
city, and taking long, silver Tanith knives to pallid, blotchy throats, they had burned their way in through the enemy’s
hindquarters. Now the Tanith First-and-Only were proving they could fight. Just like the Elector had said.
From behind a shattered pillar, Gaunt blasted with his bolter, blowing two cultists apart and destroying a
doorway. Around him, the advancing Tanith lacerated the air with precise shots from five dozen lasguns.
Near to Gaunt, a sharp-faced, older Tanith Gaunt had heard the men call Larkin was sniping cultists off the top of
the nearest balconies. His eye was tremendous. A little further on, a huge man, a gentle giant called Bragg, was
shouldering the heavy bolter and taking down walls and columns. The big weapon had originally been pintlemounted
on a sled, but Bragg had torn it off its mount and slung it up like a rifle. Gaunt had never seen a heavy bolter
carried by an unarmoured man before. The Tanith called Bragg “Try Again” Bragg. He was a terrible shot,
admittedly, but with firepower like that he could afford to be sloppy.
Just ahead, a six man fire-team led by Corbec gained the entrance to a temple building complex, grenaded the
doorway and went in with lasguns, paired off to give bounding cover.
“Heavy fire in my section!” Corbec radioed to Gaunt. “Some kind of church or temple. Could be a primary
target.” Gaunt acknowledged. He would move more teams up.
Creeping down the aisle of the massive temple, Corbec edged through rubble and heavy crossfire. He nodded a pair
past him — Rawne and Suth — and then the next. His own cover partner, Forgal, bellied up close in the mica dust of
the temple floor and unslung his lasgun.
“Down there,” he hissed, his eyes as sharp as ever. “There’s a lower storey down behind the altar. They’ve got a
lot of defence around that doorway. The big arch under the stained-glass.”
It was true.
“You smell that?” Rawne asked over the radio.
Corbec did. Decay, stale sweat, dead blood. Rank and harsh, oozing from the crypt.
Forgal began to crawl forward. A lucky shot vaporised the top of his head.
“Sacred Feth!” Corbec howled and opened up in rage, bringing the entire stained glass window down in a sheet
onto the altar.
Rawne and Suth took advantage of the confusion to grab a few more yards. Rawne unwrapped a tube-charge and
hurled it over-arm into the archway.
The blast was deafening.
Gaunt heard Corbec’s call in his ear-piece. “Get in here!” He scrambled into the smoky interior of the temple. At the
door, he paused. “Larkin! Bragg! Orcha! Varl! With me! You three, cordon the door! Cluggan, take two teams down
the flank of the building and scout!”
Gaunt entered the chapel, mashing broken glass under foot. He could smell the stink.
Corbec and Rawne were waiting for him, their other men stood around, watching with lasguns ready.
“Something down here,” Rawne said and led Gaunt on down the littered steps. Gaunt slammed fresh rounds home
into his boltgun, then holstered it and picked up Forgal’s fallen las-gun.
Beneath the chapel was an undercroft. Dead cultists were strewn like rag dolls around the smouldering floor. In
the centre of the chamber stood a rusty, metallic box, two metres square, its lid etched with twisted sigils of Chaos.
Gaunt reached out. The metal was warm. It pulsed.
He snatched his hand back.
“What is it?” asked Corbec.
“I don’t think any of us want to know,” Gaunt said. “Some relic of the enemy, some unholy object, an icon…
Whatever, it’s something valuable to these monsters, something they’re defending to the last.”
“That Sloka colonel was sure there was a reason they were holding on,” Corbec said. “Maybe they’re hoping
support will arrive in time to save this.”
“Let’s spoil those chances. I want a systematic withdrawal from this point, back out under the wall. Each man is to
leave his tube-charges here. Rawne, collect them and rig them — you seem to be good with explosives.”
Within minutes, the Ghosts had withdrawn. Rawne crouched and connected the firing pins of the small but potent
anti-personnel charges. Gaunt watched him and the door.
“Pick it up, Rawne. We haven’t much time. The enemy aren’t going to leave this area open for long.”
“Nearly done,” Rawne said. “Check the door again, sir. I thought I heard something.”
The “sir” should have warned him. As Gaunt turned, Rawne rose and clubbed him around the back of the head
with his fist. Gaunt dropped, stunned, and Rawne rolled him over next to the charges.
“A fitting place for scum like you to die, ghost maker!” he murmured. “Down here amongst the vermin and the
filth. It’s so tragic that the brave commissar didn’t make it out, but the cultists were all over us.” Rawne drew his
laspistol and lowered it towards Gaunt’s head.
Gaunt kicked out and brought Rawne down. He rolled and slammed into him, punching him once, twice. Blood
marked Rawne’s mouth.
He tried to hit again but Gaunt was so much bigger. He struck Rawne so hard he was afraid he’d broken his neck.
The Tanith lolled in the dust.
Gaunt got up, and eyed the timer setting. It was just dropping under two minutes. Time to leave.
Gaunt turned. But in the doorway of the room, the warriors of Chaos moved towards him.
The blast sent a column of dirt and fire up into the sky that could be seen from the Guard trenches across the
deadzone. Six minutes later, the defenders’ big guns stopped and fell silent. Then all firing ceased completely from
the enemy lines.
Guard units moved in, cautiously at first. They found the cultists dead at their positions. Each one had, in unison,
taken his own life, as if in response to some great loss. In the conclusion of his report on the victory at Blackshard,
General Hadrak surmised that the destruction of the Chaos relic, which had given meaning to the cult defence,
robbed them of the will or need to continue. Hadrak also noted the significant role in the victory played by the newly
founded Tanith 1st, which had supplemented his own forces. Though as C-in-C of the Blackshard action, he took
overall credit for the victory, he was magnanimous in acknowledging the work of “Gaunt’s Ghosts”, and particularly
recommended their stealth and scouting abilities.
Colonel-Commissar Gaunt, wounded in the stomach and shoulder, emerged alive from the deadzone twenty
minutes after the blast and was treated by medical teams before returning to his frigate. He might have made his way
out of the enemy lines faster, had he not carried the unconscious body of one of his officers, a Major Rawne, back to
safety.
Stiff with drug-dulled pain, Gaunt walked down the companion way of the troop carrier and into the holding bay.
Nearly nine hundred of the Tanith were billeted here. They looked up from their weapons drills and Gaunt felt the
silence on him.
“First blood to you,” he said to them. “First blood to Tanith. The first wound of vengeance. Savour it.”
By his side, Corbec began to clap. The men picked it up, more and more, until the hold shook with applause.
Gaunt eyed the crowd. Maybe there was a future here, after all. A regiment worth the leading, a prize worth
chasing all the way to glory.
His eyes found Major Rawne in the crowd. Their eyes fixed. Rawne was not applauding.
That made Gaunt laugh. He turned to Milo and gestured to the Tanith pipes cradled in his aide’s hands.
“Now you can play something,” he told him.
Gaunt walked the line through the early morning, the stink of the Monthax jungle swards filling and sickening his
senses. Tanith, working stripped to the waists, digging the wet ooze with entrenching tools to fill sacking, paused to
nod at his greetings, exchange a few words with him, or ask cautious questions about the fight to come.
Gaunt answered as best he could. As a commissar, a political officer, charged with morale and propaganda, he
could turn a good, pompous phrase. But as a colonel, he felt a duty of truth to his men. And the truth was, he knew
little of what to expect. It would be bitter, he knew that much, though the commissar part of him spared the men that
thought. Gaunt spoke of courage and glory in general, uplifting terms, talking softly and firmly as his mentor,
Commissar-General Oktar, had taught him all those years ago when he was just a raw cadet with the Hyrkans. “Save
the yelling and screaming for battle, Ibram. Before that comes, build their morale with gentle encouragement. Make it
look like you haven’t a care in the world.”
Gaunt prided himself on knowing not only the names of all his men, but a little about each of them too. A private
joke here, a common interest there. Oktar’s way, tried and tested, Emperor rest his soul these long years. Gaunt tried
to memorise each muddy, smiling face as he passed along. He knew his soul would be damned the day he was told
Trooper so-and-so had fallen and he couldn’t bring the man’s face to mind. “The dead will always haunt you,” Oktar
had told him, “so make certain the ghosts are friendly.” If only Oktar had known the literal truth of that advice.
Gaunt paused at the edge of a dispersal gully and smiled to himself at the memory. Beyond, some troopers were
kicking a balled sack of mud around in an impromptu off-watch game. The “ball” came his way, and he hoisted it
back to them on the point of his boot. Let them have their fun while it lasts. How many would be alive to play the
game again tomorrow?
How many indeed? There were losses and losses. Some worthy, some dreadful, and some plain unnecessary. Still
the memories dogged his mind in these crawling hours of waiting. Praise be the Emperor that Gaunt’s losses of
brave, common troopers would never be as great, as wholesale or as senseless as that day on Voltemand, a year
before…
TWO
A BLOODING
They were a good two hours into the dark, black-trunked forests of the Voltemand Mirewoods, tracks churning the
filthy ooze and the roar of their engines resonating from the sickly canopy of leaves above, when Colonel Ortiz saw
death.
It wore red, and stood in the trees to the right of the track, in plain sight, unmoving, watching his column of
Basilisks as they passed along the trackway. It was the lack of movement that chilled Ortiz. He did a double take,
first seeing the figure as they passed it before realising what it was.
Almost twice a man’s height, frighteningly broad, armour the colour of rusty blood, crested by recurve brass
antlers. The face was a graven death’s head. Daemon. Chaos Warrior. World Eater.
Ortiz snapped his gaze back to it and felt his blood drain away. He fumbled for his radio link.
“Alarm! Alarm! Ambush to the right!” he yelled into the set. Gears slammed and whined, and hundreds of tons of
mechanised steel shuddered, foundered and slithered on the muddy track, penned, trapped, too cumbersome to react
quickly.
By then the Chaos Space Marine had begun to move. So had its six comrades, each emerging from the woods
around them.
Panic seized Ortiz’s convoy cluster: the ten-vehicle forward portion of a heavy column of eighty flame-and-feather
painted Basilisk tanks of the “Serpents”, the Ketzok 17th Armoured Regiment, sent in to support the frontal push of
the Royal Volpone 50th, the so-called “Bluebloods”. The Ketzok had the firepower to flatten a city, but caught on a
strangled trackway, in a thick woodland, with no room to turn or traverse, and with monstrous enemies at close
quarters, far too close to bring the main guns to bear, they were all but helpless. Panic alarms spread backwards
down the straggled column, from convoy portion to portion. Ortiz heard tree trunks shatter as some commanders tried
to haul their machines off the track.
The World Eaters started baying as they advanced, wrenching out of their augmented throats deep, inhuman calls
that whooped across the trackway and shivered the metal of the tank armour. They howled the name of the bloody
abomination they worshipped.
“Small arms!” Ortiz ordered. “Use the pintle mounts!” As he spoke, he cranked round the autocannon mounted on
his vehicle’s rear and angled it at the nearest monster.
The killing started. The rasping belch of flamers reached his ears and he heard the screams of men cooking inside
their superheated tank hulls. The Chaos Marine he had first spotted reached the Basilisk ahead of his and began to
chop its shell like firewood with a chain-axe. Sparks blew up from punctured metal. Sparks, flames, metal shards,
meat.
Screaming, Ortiz trained his mounted gun on the World Eater and fired. He shot long at first, but corrected before
the monster could turn. The creature didn’t seem to feel the first hits. Ortiz clenched the trigger and streamed the
heavy tracer fire at the red spectre. At last the figure shuddered, convulsed and then blew apart.
Ortiz cursed. The World Eaters soaked up the sort of punishment that would kill a Leman Russ. He realised his
ammo drum was almost empty. He was snapping it free and shouting to his bombardier for a fresh one when the
shadow fell on him.
Ortiz turned.
Another Chaos Marine stood on the rear of the Basilisk behind him, a giant blocking out the pale sunlight. It
stooped, and howled its victory shout into his face, assaulting him with concussive sonic force and wretched odour.
Ortiz recoiled as if he had been hit by a macro shell. He could not move. The World Eater chuckled, a macabre, deep
growl from behind the visor, a seismic rumble. The chainsword in its fist whined and swung up…
The blow didn’t fall. The monster rocked, two or three times, swayed for a moment. And exploded.
Smeared with grease and ichor, Ortiz scrambled up out of his hatch. He was suddenly aware of a whole new layer
of gunfire — sustained lasgun blasts, the chatter of support weapons, the crump of grenades. Another force was
moving out of the woods, crushing the Chaos Marine ambush hard against the steel flanks of his artillery machines.
As Ortiz watched, the remaining World Eaters died. One was punctured dozens of times by lasgun fire and fell
face down into the mire. Another was flamed repeatedly as he ripped apart the wreck of a Basilisk with his steel
hands. The flames touched off the tank’s magazine and the marine was incinerated with his victims. His hideous roar
lingered long after the white-hot flames had consumed him.
The column’s saviours emerged from the forest around them. Imperial Guards: tall, dark-haired, pale-skinned men
in black fatigues, a scruffy, straggle-haired mob almost invisible in their patterned camo-cloaks. Ortiz heard strange,
disturbing pipe music strike up a banshee wail in the close forest, and a victory yelp erupted from the men. It was
met by cheers and whoops from his own crews.
Ortiz leapt down into the mud and approached the Imperial Guardsmen through the drifting smoke.
“I’m Colonel Ortiz. You boys have my earnest thanks,” he said. “Who are you?”
The nearest man, a giant with unruly black hair, a tangled, braided beard and thick, bare arms decorated with blue
spiral tattoos, smiled jauntily and saluted, bringing up his lasgun. “Colonel Corbec, Tanith First-and-Only. Our
pleasure, I’m sure.”
Ortiz nodded back. He found he was still shaking. He could barely bring himself to look down at the dead Chaos
Marine, sprawled in the mud nearby. “Takes discipline to ambush an ambush. Your men certainly know stealth. Why
is—”
He got no further. The bearded giant, Corbec, suddenly froze, a look of dismay on his face. Then he was leaping
forward with a cry, tackling Ortiz down into the blue-black mud.
The “dead” World Eater lifted his horned skull out of the muck and half-raised his bolter. But that was all. Then a
shrieking chainsword decapitated him.
The heavy, dead parts flopped back into the mud. One of them rolled.
Ibram Gaunt brandished with his keening chain sword like a duellist and then thumbed it to “idle”. He turned to
Corbec and Ortiz as they got up, caked in black filth. Ortiz stared at the tall, powerful man in the long dark coat and
cap of an Imperial Commissar. His face was blade thin, his eyes as dark as space. He looked like he could rip a
world asunder with his hands.
“Meet the boss,” Corbec chuckled at Ortiz’s side. “Colonel-Commissar Gaunt.” Ortiz nodded, wiping his face.
“So, you’re Gaunt’s Ghosts.”
Major Gilbear poured himself a brandy from the decanter on the teak stand. “Just who the hell are these awful
barbarian scum?” he asked, sipping from the huge crystal balloon.
At his desk, General Noches Sturm put down his pen and sat back. “Oh, please, help yourself to my brandy,
Gilbear,” he muttered, though the sarcasm was lost on his massive aide.
Gilbear reclined on a chaise beside the flickering amber displays of the message-caster, and gazed at his
commander. “Ghosts? That’s what they call them, isn’t it?”
Sturm nodded, observing his senior adjutant. Gilbear — Gizhaum Danver De Banzi Haight Gilbear, to give him
his full name — was the second son of the Haight Gilbears of Solenhofen, the royal house of Volpone. He was nearly
two and half metres tall and arrogantly powerful, with the big, blunt, bland features and languid, hooded eyes of the
aristocracy. Gilbear wore the grey and gold uniform of the Royal Volpone 50th, the so-called Bluebloods, who
believed they were the noblest regiment in the Imperial Guard.
Sturm sat back in his chair. “They are indeed called Ghosts. Gaunt’s Ghosts. And they’re here because I requested
them.”
Gilbear cocked a disdainful eyebrow. “You requested them?”
“We’ve had nigh on six weeks, and we can’t shake the enemy from Voltis City. They command everything west of
the Bokore Valley. Warmaster Macaroth is not pleased. All the while they hold Voltemand, they have a road into the
heart of the Sabbat Worlds. So you see I need a lever. I need to introduce a new element to break our deadlock.”
“That rabble?” Gilbear sneered. “I watched them as they mustered after the drop-ships landed them. Hairy,
illiterate primitives, with tattoos and nose rings.”
Sturm lifted a data-slate from his desktop and shook it at Gilbear. “Have you read the reports General Hadrak
filed after the Sloka took Blackshard? He credits Gaunt’s mob with the decisive incursion. It seems they excel at
stealth raids.”
Sturm got to his feet and adjusted the sit of his resplendent Blueblood staff uniform. The study was bathed in
yellow sunlight that streamed in through the conservatory doors at the end, softened by net drapes. He rested his hand
on the antique globe of Voltemand in its mahogany stand by the desk and span it idly, gazing out across the grounds of
Vortimor House. This place had been the country seat of one of Voltemand’s most honoured noble families, a vast,
grey manse, fringed with mauve climbing plants, situated in ornamental parkland thirty kilometres south of Voltis
City. It had been an ideal location to establish his Supreme Headquarters.
Outside, on the lawn, a squad of Blueblood elite in full battle dress were executing a precision synchronised drill
with chainswords. Metal flashed and whirled, perfect and poised. Beyond them, a garden of trellises and arbours led
down to a boating lake, calm and smoky in the afternoon light. Navigation lights flashed slowly on the barbed masts
of the communications array in the herbarium. Somewhere in the stable block, strutting gaudcocks whooped and
called.
You wouldn’t think there was a war on, mused Sturm. He wondered where the previous owners of the manse were
now. Did they make it off world before the first assault? Are they huddled and starving in the belly hold of a refugee
ship, reduced overnight to a level with their former vassals? Or are they bone-ash in the ruins of Kosdorf, or on the
burning Metis Road? Or did they die screaming and melting at the orbital port when the legions of Chaos first fell on
their world, vaporised with the very ships they struggled to escape in?
Who cares? thought Sturm. The war is all that matters. The glory, the crusade, the Emperor. He would only care
for the fallen when the bloody head of Chanthar, demagogue of the Chaos army that held Voltis Citadel, was served
up to him on a carving dish. And even then, he wouldn’t care much.
Gilbear was on his feet, refilling his glass. “This Gaunt, he’s quite a fellow, isn’t he? Wasn’t he with the Hyrkan
8th?”
Sturm cleared his throat, “Led them to victory at Balhaut. One of old Slaydo’s chosen favourites. Made him a
colonel — commissar, no less. It was decided he had the prestige to hammer a new regiment or two into shape, so
they sent him to the planet Tanith to supervise the rounding there. A Chaos space fleet hit the world that very night,
and he got out with just a few thousand men.”
Gilbear nodded. “That’s what I heard. Skin of his teeth. But that’s his career in tatters, stuck with an under-strength
rabbit-like that. Macaroth won’t transfer him, will he?”
Sturm managed a small smile. “Our beloved overlord does not look kindly on the favourites of his predecessor.
Especially as Slaydo granted Gaunt and a handful of others the settlement rights of the first world they conquered. He
and his Tanith rabble are an embarrassment to the new regime. But that serves us well. They will fight hard because
they have everything to prove, and everything to win.”
“I say,” said Gilbear suddenly, lowering his glass. “What if they do win? I mean, if they’re as useful as you say?”
“They will facilitate our victory,” Sturm said, pouring himself a drink. “They will not achieve anything else. We
will serve Lord Macaroth twofold, by taking this world for him, and ridding him of Gaunt and his damn Ghosts.”
“You were expecting us?” Gaunt asked, riding on the top of Ortiz’s Basilisk as the convoy moved on.
Colonel Ortiz nodded, leaning back against the raised top-hatch cover. “We were ordered up the line last night to
dig in at the north end of the Bokore Valley and pound the enemy fortifications on the western side. Soften them up, I
suppose. En route, I got coded orders sent, telling us to meet your regiment at Pavis Crossroads and transport you as
we advanced.”
Gaunt removed his cap and ran a hand through his short fair hair. “We were ordered across country to the
crossroads, all right,” he responded. “Told to meet transport there for the next leg. But my scouts picked up the
World Eaters’ stench, so we doubled back and met you early.”
Ortiz shuddered. “Good thing for us.”
Gaunt gazed along the line of the convoy as they moved on, taking in the massive bulk of the Basilisks as they
ground up the snaking mud-track through the sickly, dim forest. His men were riding on the flanks of the great war
machines, a dozen or more per vehicle, joking with the Serpent crews, exchanging drinks and smokes, some cleaning
weapons or even snoozing as the lurch of the metal beasts allowed.
“So Sturm’s sending you in?” Ortiz asked presently.
“Right down the river’s floodplain to the gates of Voltis. He thinks we can take the city where fifty thousand of his
Bluebloods have failed.”
“Can you?”
“We’ll see,” Gaunt said, without the flicker of a smile. “The Ghosts are new, unproven but for a skirmish on
Blackshard. But they have certain… strengths.” He fell silent, and seemed to be admiring the gold and turquoise
lines of the feather serpent design painted on the barrel of the Basilisk’s main weapon. Its open beak was the muzzle.
All the Ketzok machines were rich with similar decorations.
Ortiz whistled low to himself. “Down the Bokore Valley into the mouth of hell. I don’t envy you.”
Now Gaunt smiled. “Just you keep pounding the western hills and keep them busy. In fact, blow them all away to
kingdom come before we get there.”
“Deal,” laughed Ortiz.
“And don’t drop your damn aim!” Gaunt added with a threatening chuckle. “Remember you have friends in the
valley!”
Two vehicles back, Corbec nodded his thanks as he took the dark thin cigar his Basilisk commander offered.
“Doranz,” the Serpent said, introducing himself.
“Charmed,” Corbec said. The cigar tasted of licorice, but he smoked it anyway.
Lower down the hull of the tank, by Corbec’s sprawled feet, the boy Milo was cleaning out the chanters of his
Tanith pipe. It wheezed and squealed hoarsely. Doranz blanched. “I’ll tell you this: when I heard that boy’s piping
today, that hell-note, it almost scared me more than the damn blood cries of the enemy.”
Corbec chuckled. “The pipe has its uses. It rallies us, it spooks the foe. Back home, the forests move and change.
The pipes were a way to follow and not get lost.”
“Where is home?” Doranz asked.
“Nowhere now,” Corbec said and returned to his smoke.
On the back armour of another Basilisk, hulking Bragg, the biggest of the Ghosts, and small, wiry Larkin, were dicing
with two of the tank’s gun crew. Larkin had already won a gold signet ring set with a turquoise skull. Bragg had lost
all his smokes, and two bottles of sacra. Every now and then, the lurch of the tank beneath them would flip the dice,
or slide them under an exhaust baffle, prompting groans and accusations of fixing and cheating.
Up by the top hatch with the vehicle’s commander, Major Rawne watched the game without amusement. The
Basilisk commander felt uneasy about his passenger. Rawne was slender, dark and somehow dangerous. A starburst
tattoo covered one eye. He was not… likeable or open like the other Ghosts seemed to be.
“So, major… what’s your commissar like?” the commander began, by way of easing the silence.
“Gaunt?” Rawne asked, turning slowly to face the Serpent. “He’s a despicable bastard who left my world to die
and one day I will slay him with my own hands.”
“Oh,” said the commander and found something rather more important to do down below.
Ortiz passed Gaunt his flask. The afternoon was going and they were losing the light. Ortiz consulted a map-slate,
angling it to show Gaunt. “Navigation puts us about two kilometres or so short of Pavis Crossroads. We’ve made
good time. We’ll be on it before dark. I’m glad, I didn’t want to have to turn on the floods and running lights to
continue.”
“What do we know about Pavis?” Gaunt asked.
“Last reports were it was held by a battalion of Bluebloods. That was at oh-five-hundred this morning.”
“Wouldn’t hurt to check,” Gaunt mused. “There are worse things than rolling into an ambush position at twilight,
but not many. Cluggan!”
He called down the hull to a big, grey-haired Ghost sat with others playing cards.
“Sir!” Cluggan said, scrambling back up the rocking Basilisk.
“Sergeant, take six men, jump down and scout ahead of the column. We’re two kilometres short of this
crossroads,” Gaunt showed Cluggan the map. “Should be clear, but after our tangle with the damn World Eaters we’d
best be sure.”
Cluggan saluted and slid back to his men. In a few moments they had gathered up their kits and weapons and
swung down off the skirt armour onto the track. A moment more and they had vanished like smoke into the woods.
“That is impressive,” Ortiz said.
At Pavis Crossroads, the serpents spoke. Stretching their great painted beaks towards the night sky, they began their
vast barrage.
Brin Milo cowered in the shadow of a medical Chimera, pressing his hands to his ears. He’d seen two battles up
close: the fall of Tanith Magna and the storming of the citadel on Blackshard, but this was the first time he had ever
encountered the sheer numbing wrath of armoured artillery.
The Ketzok Basilisks were dug in along the ridge in a straggled line about a mile long. They were hull-down into
the grey earth, main weapons swung high, hurling death at the western hills across the valley nine kilometres away.
They were firing at will, a sustained barrage that could, Corbec had assured him, go on all night. Every second at
least one gun was sounding, lighting the darkness with its fierce muzzle flash, shaking the ground with its firing and
recoil.
Pavis Crossroads was a stone obelisk marking the junction of the Metis Road that ran up the valley from Voltis
City, and the Mirewood track that carried on towards the east. The Serpents’ armour had rolled in at nightfall,
ousting the encamped Bluebloods who held the junction, and deploying around the ridge-line, looking west. As the
first stars began to shine, Ortiz’s men began their onslaught.
Milo kept his eyes sharp for the commissar, and when he saw Gaunt striding towards a tented dugout beside the
orbital communication stack, accompanied by his senior officers, Milo ran to join them.
“My scope!” requested Gaunt over the barrage. Milo pulled the commissar’s brass-capped nightscope from his
pack and Gaunt stepped up onto the parapet, scanning out of the dugout.
Corbec leaned up close by him, a thin black tube protruding from his beard.
Gaunt glanced round. “What is that thing?” he asked.
Corbec took it out and displayed it proudly. “Cigar. Liquorice, no less. Won a box off my gun-crate’s CO. and I
think I’m getting a taste for them. See much?” he added.
“I can see the lights of Voltis. Watch fires and shrine-lights mostly. Not so inviting.”
Gaunt flipped his scope shut and jumped down from the parapet, handing the device back to Milo. The boy had
already set up the field-map, a glass plate in a metal frame mounted like an easel on a brass tripod. Gaunt cranked
the knurled lever on the side and the glass slowly lit with bluish light. He dropped in a ceramic slide engraved with
the local geography and then angled the screen to show the assembled men: Corbec, Rawne, Cluggan, Orcha and the
other officers.
“Bokore Valley,” Gaunt said, tapping the glass viewer with the tip of his long, silver Tanith war-knife. As if for
emphasis, the nearest Basilisk outside fired and the dugout shook. The field map wobbled and soil trickled in from
the roof.
“Four kilometres wide, twelve long, flanked to the west by steep hills where the enemy is well established. At the
far end, Voltis City, the old Capital of Voltemand. Thirty metre curtain walls of basalt. Built as a fortress three
hundred years ago, when they knew the art. The invading Chaos Host from off-planet seized it at day one as their
main stronghold. The Volpone 50th have spent six weeks trying to crack it, but the bastards we met today show the
kind of force they’ve been up against. We’ll have a go tonight.”
He looked up, oblivious to the constant thunder outside. “Major Rawne?”
Rawne stepped forward, almost reluctant to be anywhere near Gaunt. No one knew what had passed between them
when they had been alone together on Blackshard, but everyone had seen Gaunt carry Rawne to safety on his
shoulder, despite his own injuries. Surely that sort of action bonded men, not deepened their enmity?
Rawne adjusted a dial on the field-map’s edge so that the plate displayed a different section of the chart-slide.
“The approach is straightforward. The Bokore River runs along the wide valley floor. It is broad and slow-moving,
especially at this time of year. Most of the way is choked with bulrushes and waterweed. We can move down the
river channel undetected.”
“You’ve scouted this?” Gaunt asked.
“My squad returned not half an hour ago,” Rawne said smoothly. “The Bluebloods had tried it a number of times,
but they are semi-armoured and the mud was too great an impediment. We are lighter — and we are good.”
Gaunt nodded. “Corbec?”
The big man sucked on his cigar. His genial eyes twinkled and it made Milo smile. “We move by dark, of course.
In the next half-hour. Staggered squads of thirty men to spread out our traces.” He tapped the map-screen at another
place. “Primary point of entry is the old city Watergate. Heavily defended of course. Secondary squads under
Sergeant Cluggan will attempt to storm the wall at the western sanitation outfalls. I won’t pretend either way will be
a picnic.”
“Objective,” Gaunt said, “get inside and open the city. We’ll move in squads. One man in every ten will be
carrying as much high explosive as he can. Squad leaders should select any man with demol experience. We provide
cover for these demolition specialists to allow them to set charges that will take out sections of wall or gates.
Anything that splits the city open.
“I’ve spoken to the Blueblood colonel. He has seven thousand men in motorised units ready to advance and take
advantage of any opening we can make. They will be monitoring on channel eighty. The signal will be
‘Thunderhead’.”
There was silence, silence except for the relentless hammering of the Basilisk guns.
“Form up and move out,” Gaunt said.
Outside, Ortiz stood talking to several of his senior officers, one of them Doranz. They saw the Ghost officers
emerge from the dugout and orders being given.
Across the emplacement, Ortiz caught Gaunt’s eye. It was too loud for words, so he clenched his fist and rapped it
twice against his heart, an old gesture for luck.
Gaunt nodded.
“Scary men,” Doranz said. “I almost feel sorry for the enemy.” Ortiz glanced round at him.
“I’m joking, of course,” Doranz added, but Ortiz wasn’t sure he was.
Midnight had seen them waist deep in the stinking black water of the Bokore River reed beds, assailed by clouds
of biting flies. Three hours’ hard trudge through the oily shallows of the old river, and now the sheer walls of Voltis
rose before them, lit by cressets and braziers high up. Behind them, like a distant argument, the Basilisks spat death
up into the heavens, a distant, rolling roar and a series of orange flashes on the skyline.
Gaunt adjusted his nightscope and panned it round, seeing features in the darkness as a green negative. The
watergate was thirty metres across and forty tall, the mouth of a great chute and adjoining system that returned water
to the Bokore once it had driven the mills inside the city. Gaunt knew that somewhere sluices must have been
lowered, and the flow staunched, closing off the chute’s operation. Sandbagged emplacements could be made out up
in the shadows behind the gate’s breastwork.
He adjusted his micro-bead link. “Corbec?”
Colm Corbec heard his commander in the darkness and acknowledged. He waded forward through the reeds to
Bragg, who had hunkered down behind a rotting jetty.
“When you’re ready…” Corbec invited.
Bragg grinned, teeth bright in the starlight. He dragged the canvas cover off one of the two huge weapons he had
lugged on his shoulders from Pavis Crossroads. The polished metal of the missile launcher had been dulled down
with smears of Mirewood mud.
“Try Again” Bragg was a spectacularly lousy shot. But the watergate was a big target, and the missile rack held
four melta-missiles.
The night exploded. Three missiles went straight up the throat of the chute. The force of the heat-blast sent stone
debris, metal shards, water vapour and body parts out in a radius of fifty yards. The fourth vaporised a chunk of
wall, and brought down a small avalanche of basalt chunks. For a moment the heat was so intense that Gaunt’s
nightscope read nothing but emerald glare. Then it showed him the chiselled mouth of the watergate had become a
bubbling, blazing wound in the huge wall, a ragged, slumping incision in the sheer basalt. He could hear agonised
screaming from within the chute. Beyond the city wall, alarm bells and sirens rose in pandemonium.
The Ghosts charged the watergate. Orcha led the first squad up the sloping drain-away under the molten arch of
ruptured stone. He and three of his men swung flamers in wide arcs, scorching and scouring up unto the darkness of
the echoing chute. Behind them, Corbec brought in fire teams with lasguns who darted down into the side passages
and cisterns of the watergate, butchering the cultists who had limped or crawled into cover after the first attack.
The third wave went in, under Major Rawne. In the front rank was Bragg, his empty launcher discarded in favour
of the heavy bolter that he had liberated from its mounting back on Blackshard and now lugged around like a smaller
man might heft a heavy rifle.
Gaunt leapt forward too, bolt pistol in one hand, chain sword in the other. He bellowed after his attacking men, all
of them racing silhouettes backlit against the glittering water by fire. Milo sprang up, fumbling with the Tanith pipes
under his arm.
“Now would be a good time, Brin,” Gaunt said. Milo found the mouthpiece, inflated the bag and began to keen an
old battle lament of Tanith, “The Dark Path of the Forest”.
Up in the chute, Orcha and his squad heard the shrill wail of the pipes outside. Damp darkness was before them.
“Close up,” Orcha snapped into his micro-bead.
“Aye.”
“To your left,” Brith yelled suddenly.
An assault cannon raged out of the darkness of a side chute. Brith, Orcha and two others disintegrated instantly
into red mist and flesh pulp.
Troopers Gades and Caffran ducked back behind the buttress work of the huge vault.
“Enemy fire!” Caffran yelled into his bead. “They have the chute covered in a killing sweep.”
Corbec cursed. He might have expected this.
“Stay down!” he ordered the young Ghost over the mike as he beckoned his first two squads up the lower chute,
black water swilling around their knees.
“Hell of a foul place for a firefight,” mourned Mad Larkin, scoping with his lasgun.
“Stow it, Larks,” Corbec growled. Ahead they heard the nightmare chatter of the cannon, and the added rhythm of
drums and guttural chants. Corbec knew Larkin was right. A tight, confined, unyielding stone tunnel was no place for
a serious fight. This was a two-way massacre in the making.
“They’re just trying to psyche us out,” he told his Ghosts smoothly as they edged forward.
“What d’you know? It’s working!” Varl said.
The drums and chanting got louder, but suddenly the cannon shut off.
“It’s stopped,” Caffran reported over the link.
Corbec looked round into Larkin’s crazed eyes. “What do you think? A trick to lure us out?”
Larkin sniffed the thick air. “Smell that? Burning ceramite. I’d wager they’ve got an overheat jam.”
Corbec didn’t answer. He cinched his bayonet onto his lasgun and charged up the slope of the chute, screaming
louder and shriller than Milo’s pipes. In uproar, the Ghost squads followed him.
Caffran and Gades joined the charge, bellowing, weapons held low as they splashed out from behind the buttress
into the main vault.
Corbec leapt clear a sandbag line damming one gully and disembowelled the two cultists who were struggling to
unjam the assault cannon.
Larkin dropped down on one knee in the brackish soup and popped the cover on his lasgun’s darkscope. Carefully
selecting his expert long shots, he blasted four cultists further down the chute.
Las and bolt fire slammed back at the Ghosts, dropping several of them. The charging Guardsmen met the cultist
force head on in a tight, tall sub-chute, no wider than two men abreast. Bodies exploded, blasted at close range.
Bayonets and blades sliced and jabbed. Corbec was in the thick of it. Already a chain sword had gashed his left
hand and cost him a finger, and blood blurted from a slash to his shoulder. He speared a man, but lost his gun when
the corpse’s weight on the bayonet tore it out of his hands. He ripped out his fallback weapons, a laspistol and his
Tanith knife of sheer silver. Around him in the frenzy, men killed or died in a confined press that was packed in close
like a busy work transit, crowded at rush hour. Already the water level was rising because of the depth of bodies and
body parts in the gully.
Corbec shot a cultist through the head as he was charged, and then lashed sideways with the silver blade, opening
a throat.
“For Tanith! First and Last and Only!” he screamed.
Advancing up the tunnel fifty paces back, Gaunt could hear the sheer tumult of the nightmarish close-quarters fight in
the chute. He looked down and saw that the trickle of Bokore River water that ran down over his boots was thick
and red.
Ten yards further, he found Trooper Gades, part of Orcha’s original squad. The boy had lost his legs to a
chainsword and the water had carried his twitching form back down the smooth slope of the channel.
“Medic! Dorden! To me!” Gaunt bellow, cradling the coughing, gagging Gades in his arms.
Gades looked up at his commissar. “A real close fight, so it is,” he said with remarkable clarity, “packed in like
fish in a can. The Ghosts will make ghosts tonight.”
Then he coughed again. Bloody matter vomited from his mouth and he was gone.
Gaunt stood.
Milo had faltered, looking down at Gades’ stricken, miserable death.
“Play up!” urged Gaunt, and turned to shout down the chute to the Ghost main force in the bulrushes. “Advance!
Narrow file! For the Emperor and the glory of Tanith!”
With a deafening bellow, Gaunt’s Ghosts charged forward en masse, breaking down into files of three, surging into
the throttling entrance to hell.
Up ahead, in the dark, close, smoky killing zone, Rawne slumped against a buttress, splashed in gore, and panted.
By his side, Larkin squatted and fired shot after shot into the darkness.
Corbec suddenly loomed out of the smoke, a terrible apparition drenched in blood. “Back!” he hissed. “Back
down the chute! Sound the retreat!”
“What is it?” Rawne said.
“What’s that rumbling?” Larkin asked, distracted, pressing his ear to the stone work. “Whole tunnel is vibrating!”
“Water,” Corbec said grimly. “They’ve opened the sluices. They’re going to wash us out!”
The cultists were everywhere.
Sergeant Cluggan’s secondary expedition force poured in through the stinking crypts of the western sanitation
outfalls, and the enemy rose to meet them all around. It was hand to hand, each step of the way won by strength and
keen blades. The dark, tight confines of the drainage tunnels were lit by the flashes of lasfire, and shots ricocheted
from the roof and walls.
“What the hell is that smell?” Forbin wailed, blasting away down an airless cavity with his lasgun.
“What do you think? This is the main sewage drain,” Brodd snapped, a one-eyed man in his fifties years. “Notice
how the others get the nice clean watergate.”
“Keep it together!” Cluggan snarled, firing in a wide sweep and cutting down a trio of attacking cultists. “Forget
the smell. It’s always been a dirty job.”
More, heavy fire came their way. Forbin lost his left arm and then the side of his head.
Cluggan, Brodd and the others returned fire in the close channel. Cluggan eyed the cultist troops they cut through:
bloated, twisted men in robes that had been white silk before they had been dyed in vats of blood. They had come
from off-world, part of the vast host of Chaos cultists that had descended like locusts onto Voltemand and destroyed
its people. The sigils and runes of the blasphemy Khorne were cut into the flesh of their brows and cheeks. They
were well equipped, with bolters and lasguns, and armoured. Cluggan hoped to the sweet, dead gods of Tanith that
his commissar was faring better.
The Ghosts staggered and stumbled back from the spewing watergate, through the reed beds, towards the
comparative cover of the riverbank. Enemy fire from the walls high above killed dozens, their bodies joining the
hundreds swept out, swirling and turning, by the torrent of brown water roaring from the watergate.
Micro-bead traffic was frantic with cross-chatter and desperately confused calls. Despite their discipline, the
madness of the flight from the water had broken Gaunt’s main force into a ragged jumble, scrambling for their lives.
Soaked through, furious, Gaunt found himself sheltering by some willows in a scummy river bend eighty yards
from the watergate. With him were Caffran, Varl, a corporal called Meryn and two others.
Gaunt cursed. Cultists he could fight… World Eaters, daemons… anything. He’d set square with any beast in the
cosmos. But seventy million litres of water pressured down through a stone conduit…
“May have lost as many as forty to the flood,” Varl said. He’d dragged Caffran by the tunic from the water and the
young man could only retch and cough.
“Get a confirmed figure from the squad leaders! I don’t want rumours!” Gaunt snarled, then keyed his own radio
link and spoke into his bead. “Squad leaders! Discipline the radio traffic. I want regroup status! Corbec! Rawne!”
The channels crackled and a more ordered litany of units and casualties reeled in.
“Corbec?” Gaunt asked.
“I’m west of you, sir. On the banks. Got about ninety men with me.” Corbec’s voice hissed back. “Assessment?”
“Tactical? You can forget the watergate, sir. Once they realised they couldn’t hold us out in a straight fight, they
blew the sluices. It could run at flood for hours. By then they’ll have the chute exits on the city side sewn up with
emplacements, maybe even mines.”
Gaunt cursed again. He wiped a wet hand across his face. They’d been so close and now it was all lost. Voltis
would not be his.
“Sir?” Meryn called to him. The corporal was listening to other frequencies on his bead. “Channel eighty. The
word has just been given.”
Gaunt crossed to him, adjusting his own setting. “What?”
“The word. ‘Thunderhead’,” Meryn said, confused.
“Source that signal!” Gaunt snapped, “If someone thinks that’s a joke, I’ll—”
He got no further.
The blast was so loud, it almost went beyond sound. The Shockwave mashed into them, chopping the water like a
white squall. A kilometre away, a hundred metre section of the curtain wall blew out, ripping a vast wound in the
city’s flank, burning, raw, exposed.
The channels went mad with frenzied calls and whoops.
Gaunt looked on in disbelief. Corbec’s voice cut through, person to person on the link.
“It’s Cluggan, sir! The old bastard got his boys into the sanitation outfalls and they managed to dump all of their
high-ex into a treatment cistern under the walls. Blew the crap out of the cultists.”
“So I saw, colonel,” Gaunt said wryly.
“I mean it literally, sir,” Corbec crackled innocuously. “It was Cluggan sent the signal. We may have lost the fight
to take the watergate, but Cluggan has won us the battle!”
Gaunt slumped back against a tree bole, up to his waist in the stinking river. Around him the men were laughing
and cheering.
Exhaustion swept over him. And then he too began to laugh.
General Sturm took breakfast at nine. The stewards served him toasted black bread, sausage and coffee. He read a
stack of data-slates as he ate, and the message-caster on the sideboard behind him chattered and dealt out a stream of
orbital deployment updates.
“Good news,” said Gilbear, entering with a coffee and a message slate in hand. “The best, in fact. Seems your
gamble paid off. These Ghost fellows have taken Voltis. Broken it wide out. Our attack units followed them in en
masse. Colonel Maglin says the city will be cleansed by nightfall.”
Sturm dabbed his mouth with a serviette. “Send transmissions of congratulation and encouragement to Maglin and
to Gaunt’s mob. Where are they now?”
Gilbear eyed his slate and helped himself to a sausage from the dish. “Seems they’ve pulled out, moving back to
Pavis Crossroads along the eastern side of the Bokore Valley.”
Sturm set down his silver cutlery and started to type into his memo-slate. “The greater half of our work here is
accomplished, thanks to Gaunt,” he told the intrigued Gilbear. “Now we thank him. Send these orders under extreme
encryption to the CO. of the Ketzok Basilisks at Pavis. Without delay, Gilbear.”
Gilbear took the slate. “I say…” he began.
Sturm fixed him with a stare. “There are dangerous cultist units fleeing along the eastern side of the valley, aren’t
there, Gilbear? Why, you’ve just read me the intelligence reports that confirm it.”
Gilbear began to grin. “So I did, sir.”
Colonel Ortiz snatched the radio from his com-officer and yelled. “This is Ortiz! Yes! I know, but I expressly query
the last orders we received. I realise that, but I don’t care! No, I-Listen to me! Oh, general! Yes, I… I see. I see, sir.
No, sir. Not for a moment. Of course for the glory of the Emperor. Sir. Ortiz out.”
He sank back against the metal flank of his Basilisk. “Make the guns ready,” he told his officers. “In the name of
the Emperor, make them ready.”
The guns had been silent for ten hours. Ortiz hoped he would never hear them blaze again. Dawn frosted the horizon
with light. Down in the valley, and in the Blueblood emplacements, victory celebrations continued with abandon.
Dorentz ran over to Ortiz and shook him. “Look, sir!” he babbled. “Look!”
Men were coming up the Metis Road out of the valley towards them, tired men, weary men, filthy men, walking
slowly, carrying their dead and wounded. They were a straggled column that disappeared back into the morning mist.
“In the name of mercy…” Ortiz stammered. All around, shocked, silent Basilisk crew were leaping down from
their machines and going to meet the battered men, supporting them, helping them, or simply staring in appalled
disbelief.
Ortiz walked over to meet the arrival. He saw the tall figure in the long coat, now ragged, striding wearily out of
the mist. Ibram Gaunt was half-carrying a young Ghost whose head was a bloody mess of bandages.
He stopped in front of Ortiz and let medics take the wounded Ghost from him.
“I want—” Ortiz began.
Gaunt’s fist silenced him.
“He’s here,” Gilbear said with an insouciant smirk. Sturm got to his feet and straightened his jacket.
“Bring him in,” he said.
Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt marched into the study. He stood, glowering at Sturm and his adjutant.
“Gaunt!” Sturm said. “You opened the way for the Royal Volpone. Good show! I hear Chanthar turned a melta on
himself.” He paused and absently tapped at a data-slate on his desk. “But then this business with what’s-hisname…?”
“Ortega, sir,” Gilbear said helpfully.
“Ortiz,” Gaunt corrected.
“The Ketzok fellow. Striking a fellow officer. That’s a shooting offence, and you know it, Gaunt. Won’t have it, not
in this army. No, sir.”
Gaunt breathed deeply. “Despite knowing our position, and line of retreat, the artillery unit pounded the eastern
flanks of the Bokore Valley for six hours straight. They call the phenomenon ‘friendly fire’, but I can tell you when
you’re in the target zone with nothing but twigs and dust for cover, it’s nothing like friendly. Host nearly three
hundred men, another two hundred injured. Amongst the dead was Sergeant Cluggan, who had led the second prong
of my assault and whose actions had actually won us the city.”
“Bad show indeed,” Sturm admitted, “but you must learn to expect this kind of loss, Gaunt. This is war.” He
tossed the data-slate aside. “Now this hitting business. Chain of command and all that. My hands are tied. It’s to be a
court martial.”
Gaunt was level and unblinking. “If you’re going to shoot me for it, get on with it. I struck Ortiz in the heat of the
moment. In hindsight, I realise he was probably following orders. Some damn fool orders from HQ.”
“Now look, you jumped up—” Gilbear began, stepping forward.
“Would you like me to demonstrate what I did to Ortiz?” Gaunt asked the bigger man acidly.
“Silence, both of you!” snarled Sturm. “Commissar Gaunt… Colonel- commissar… I take my duty seriously, and
that duty is to enforce the discipline and rule of Warmaster Macaroth, and through him the beloved Emperor himself,
strictly and absolutely. The Imperial Guard is based upon the towering principles of respect, authority, unswerving
loyalty and total obedience. Any aberration, even from a officer of your stature, is to be— What the hell is that
noise?”
He crossed to the window. What he saw made him gawp speechlessly. The Basilisk tank thundering up the drive
was dragging part of the main gate after it and scattering gaudcocks and drilling Bluebloods indiscriminately in its
path. It slewed to a halt on the front lawn, demolishing an ornamental fountain in a spray of water and stone.
A powerful man in the uniform of a Serpent colonel leapt down and strode for the main entrance to the house. His
face was set and mean, swollen with bruises down the left side. A door slammed. There was some shouting, some
running footsteps. Another slamming door.
Some moments later, an aide edged into the study, holding out a data-slate for Sturm. “Colonel Ortiz has just filed
an incident report. He suggested you saw it at once, sir.”
Gilbear snatched it and read it hastily. “It seems that Major Ortiz wishes to make it clear he was injured by his
own weapon’s recoil during the recent bombardment.” Gilbear looked up at Sturm with a nervous laugh. “That
means—”
“I know what it means!” Sturm snapped. The general glared at Gaunt, and Gaunt glared right back, unblinking.
“I think you should know,” Gaunt said, low and deadly, “it seems that callous murder can be committed out here in
the lawless warzones, and the fact of it can be hidden by the confusion of war. You should bear that in mind, general,
sir.”
Sturm was lost for words for a moment. By the time he had remembered to dismiss Gaunt, the commissar had
already gone.
“Oh, for Feth’s sake, play something more cheerful,” Corbec said from his troop-ship bunk, flexing his bandaged
hand. He was haunted by the ghost of his missing finger. Appropriate, he thought.
In the bunk below him, Milo squeezed the bladder of his pipes and made them let out a moan, a shrill, sad sigh. It
echoed around the vast troop bay of the huge, ancient starship, where a thousand Tanith Ghosts were billeted in
bunks. The dull rhythm of the warp engines seemed to beat in time to the wailing pipes.
“How about… ‘Euan Fairlow’s March’?” Milo asked.
Above him, Corbec smiled, remembering the old jig, and the nights he heard it played in the taverns of Tanith
Magna.
“That would be very fine,” he said.
The energetic skip of the jig began and quickly snaked out across the iron mesh of the deck, between the aisles of
bunks, around stacks of kits and camo-cloaks, through the smoky groups where men played cards or drank, over
bunks where others slept or secretly gazed at portraits of women and children who were forever lost, and tried to
hide their tears.
Enjoying the tune, Corbec looked up from his bunk when he heard footsteps approach down the deck-plates. He
jumped up when he saw it was Gaunt. The commissar was dressed as he had first met him, fifty days before, in highwaisted
dress breeches with leather braces, a sleeveless undershirt and jack boots.
“Sir!” Corbec said, surprised. The tune faltered, but Gaunt smiled and waved Milo on. “Keep playing, lad. It does
us good to hear your merrier tunes.”
Gaunt sat on the edge of Milo’s bunk and looked up at Corbec.
“Voltemand is credited as a victory for the Volpone Bluebloods,” he told his number two frankly. “Because they
seized the city. Sturm mentions our participation with commendations in his report. But this one won’t win us our
world.”
“Feth take ’em!” spat Corbec.
“There will be other battles. Count on it.”
“I’m afraid I do, sir,” Corbec smiled.
Gaunt bent down and opened the kit-bag he was carrying. He produced a half dozen bottles of sacra.
“In the name of all that’s good and holy!” Corbec said, jumping down from his bunk. “Where—”
“I’m an Imperial commissar,” Gaunt said. “I have pull. Do you have glasses?”
Chuckling, Corbec pulled a stack of old shot glasses from his kit.
“Call Bragg over, I know he likes this stuff,” Gaunt said. “And Varl and Meryn. Mad Larkin. Suth. Young
Caffran… hell’s teeth, why not Major Rawne too? And one for the boy. There’s enough to share. Enough for
everyone.” He nodded down the companion way to the three bewildered naval officers who were approaching with
a trolley laden with wooden crates.
“What do we drink to?” Corbec asked.
“To Sergeant Cluggan and his boys. To victory. And to the victories we are yet to have.”
“Drink to revenge, too,” Milo said quietly from his bunk, setting down his pipes. Gaunt grinned. “Yes, that too.”
“You know, I’ve got just the treat to go with this fine brew,” Corbec announced, searching his pockets. “Cigars,
liquorice flavour…”
He broke off. What he had pulled from his coat pocket had ceased to be cigars a good while before. There were a
matted, frayed, waterlogged mess.
Corbec shrugged and grinned, his eyes twinkling as Gaunt and the others laughed.
“Ah, well,” he sighed philosophically, “Some you win…”
Heavy, spoon-billed wading birds flew west across the lines, white against the encroaching dark. In the thickets, the
daytime chirruping insects gave up their pitches to the night beetles, the nocturnal crickets, the tick-flies, creatures
that spiralled and swam in the light of the stove fires and filled the long hot darkness with their percussion. Other
cries rolled in the sweaty air: the whoops and gurgles of unseen climbers and grazers in the swamp. The distant
artillery had fallen silent.
Gaunt returned to the command shed just as the grille-shaded watch lights came on, casting their greenish glow
downwards into the slush, bull’s-eye covers damping their out-flung light in any direction other than down. No sense
in making a long range target of the base. Furry, winged insects the size of chubby hands flew in at once to bounce
persistently off the lit grilles with a dull, intermittent thok thok thok.
Gaunt took one last look around the base site, now distinguished only by the points of light: the cook-fires, stoves,
watch lights and moving torches. He sighed and went inside.
The command centre was long and low, with a roof of galvanised corrugate and walls of double-ply flak-board.
The floor was fresh-cut local wood sawn into planks and treated with vile-smelling lacquer. Blast shutters on the
windows stood half-open and the wire screens inside them were already thick with a fuzzy, quivering residue — the
mangled bodies of moths and night-bugs which had thrown themselves at the mesh.
Gaunt’s command equipment and his duffel bags of personal effects were set off the floor on blocks of wood.
They’d been sat directly on the floor for the first two days until it was discovered that where damp didn’t seep up,
burrowing worms did.
He draped his coat on a wire hanger and hung it from a nail on the overhead rafter, then pulled up a camp chair
and sat down heavily. Before him, block-mounted, sat a cogitator, a vox-uplink and a flat-screen mimeograph. A
tech-priest had spent over an hour diligently intoning prayers of function as he made the sacred machines ready. They
were still propped in their half-open wrought-iron casings to protect against the damp, and thick power feeds snaked
off from them and ran from clip supports on the rafters, out of a socket-shutter and off to the distant generator. Lights
and light images shimmered and flickered on glass plates glossed by condensation. Setting dials throbbed a dull
orange. The vox-link made a low-level serpent hiss as it rose and fell through frequencies.
Gaunt leaned forward and idly surveyed the latest information and tactical data coming through from the orbital
fleet and other units. A skein of coded runes crossed and blinked on the dark glass.
Quiet as nightfall, Milo entered from the ante-room. He offered a pewter beaker to his commissar. Gaunt took it
with a nod, delighting at the beaded coolness of the metal.
“The tech-priests got the cooling units working again just now,” Milo muttered by way of explanation. “For a few
minutes. It’s only water, but it’s cold.”
Gaunt nodded his appreciation and sipped. The water was metallic and sharp, but it was deliciously cool.
There was a thump on the outside step, then a quiet knock at the door. Gaunt smiled. The thump had been
deliberate, a reassuring advance warning from a man who made no sound if he did not wish to.
“Come in, Mkoll,” Gaunt said.
Mkoll entered, his lined face a little quizzical as if surprised at being recognised in advance. “Patrol report, sir,”
he said, standing stiffly in the doorway.
Gaunt gestured him to a seat. Mkoll’s battledress and cloak were drenched in wet mud. Everything including his
face was splattered — everything except his lasgun, miraculously clean.
“Let’s have it.”
“Their positions are still far back,” Mkoll began, “beyond the offensive line coded alpha pink. A few forward
patrols.”
“Trouble?”
The powerful, wiry man grimaced noncommittally. “Nothing we couldn’t handle.”
“I’ve always admired your modesty,” Gaunt said, “but I need to know.”
Mkoll screwed up his mouth and nose. “We took six of them in the western swamps. No losses on our side.”
Gaunt nodded approval. He liked Mkoll, the Tanith’s finest scout. Even in a regiment of stealthers and covert
warriors, Mkoll was exceptional. A woodsman back home on lost Tanith, he had reconnaissance skills that had
proved themselves time and again to the Ghosts. A ghost amongst ghosts, and modest with it. He never bragged, and
it was certain he had more to brag about than most.
Gaunt offered his beaker to the man.
“Thank you, sir, no.” Mkoll looked down at his hands.
“It’s cold,” Gaunt assured him.
“I can tell. But no. I’d rather go without something I could get used to.”
Gaunt shrugged and sipped again. “So they’re not moving?”
“Not yet. We sighted a… I’m not sure what it was, an old ruin of some kind.” Mkoll rose and pointed to a position
on the wall chart. “Around here, far as I can tell. Could be nothing, but I’d like to follow it through with a survey in
the morning.”
“An enemy position?”
“No, sir. Something… that was already here.”
“You’re right: deserves a look. In the morning then,” Gaunt agreed. “If that’ll be all, sir?”
“Dismissed, Mkoll.”
“I’ll never get the measure of him,” Gaunt said to Milo after Mkoll had left. “Quietest man I’ve ever known.”
“That’s what he does, isn’t it, sir?” Milo said. “What?”
“Quiet.”
THREE
SOUND AND FURY
All around there was a hushing sound, as if the whole world wanted to silence him.
Mkoll bellied in low amid the forest of ferns, trying to pick through the oceanic rushing sound they made as the
wind stirred them. The fern growth in that part of Ramillies 268-43, flourishing on the thin, ashy soils of the longcold
volcanic slopes, was feathery and fibrous, mottled stalks rough as cane rising three man-heights into swaying
multi-part fronds as white as water-ice.
They reminded him of the nal-wood forests back home, when there was still a back home, the nal-woods in
winter, when he’d gone out logging and hunting. Frost had crusted the evergreen needles on the sighing trees then
until they had tinkled like wind chimes.
Here, now, there was only the sigh, the motion of the dry ferns and the clogging dust that got into every pore and
rasped the soft tissue at the back of the throat. The sunlight was bright and harsh, stabbing down through the pale,
spare air out of a sky translucent blue. It made a striated web out of the ground cover under the ferns — stark sunsplashes
and jagged shadows of blackness.
He crept forward twenty metres into a break of skeleton brush. His lower legs were already double-wrapped with
chain-cloth to protect against the shredding thorns. He had his lasgun held to his chest on a tightly cinched strap to
keep it clear of the dust but, every ten minutes or so, he checked its moving parts and cleared the dust, fern-fibres,
twig-shreds and burrs that accumulated constantly.
Several cracks made him turn and freeze, sliding his gun into a firing grip between smooth, dry palms. Something
was moving through the thicket to his left, cracking the occasional spent thorn underfoot.
To be fair, they were moving with extreme and trained stealth, but still their progress sounded like a careless
march to Mkoll’s acute hearing.
Mkoll drew his knife, its long silver blade deliberately dulled with ash. He backed into a thorn stalk and moulded
his body to the kinking plant. Two steps, one.
He swung out, only pulling back his blade at the last moment.
Trooper Dewr cried out and fell backwards, splintering dry stalks as he dropped. Mkoll was on top of him in a
second, pinning his arms and pushing the blade against his neck.
“Sacred Feth! You could’ve killed me!” Dewr barked agitatedly.
“Yes, I could,” said Mkoll, a whisper.
He relaxed his grip, rolled off and let the man rise.
“So could anything else out here, noise you were making.”
“I…” Dewr dropped his voice suddenly. “Are we alone?”
Mkoll didn’t answer. Chances were, if anything else was out here, it would have heard Dewr’s fall too.
“I didn’t mean anything,” Dewr began hoarsely, wincing as he plucked out the thorns he had fallen on.
Mkoll was scanning around, his gun ready. “What the feth did they teach you during basic?” he whispered.
“You’re meant to be a scout!”
Dewr didn’t reply. All the scouts knew Mkoll’s exacting standards, and knew just as well how they all failed to
meet them. Dewr felt angry, in fact. During basic training, before that as a hunter in the southern gameland of Tanith
Attica, he’d been reckoned as a good tracker. That was why they had selected him for the scout unit when the
regiment mustered, for feth’s sake! And this old bastard made him feel like a fool, a clumsy fool!
Wordlessly, ignoring the stare he knew Dewr was boring into the back of his head, Mkoll signalled an advance,
heading down the slope into the fern-choked vale.
The Tanith had arrived on Ramillies two weeks before, just in time to miss the main action. The Adeptus Astartes
had cleaned out and secured the four enemy strongholds, banishing Chaos from the world. The Ghosts had assembled
on the low plains near one burning fortress, seeing Space Marines, threatening bulks in the smoky distance like the
giants of myth, piling the ragged corpses of slain cultists onto pyres. The air had been thick with filthy char.
It seemed some small components of the enemy had fled the defeat, making into the fern forests in the north, too
small and insignificant for the glorious Space Marines to waste time upon. The commissar was charged with a
search and destroy detail. The Ghosts had advanced into the low hills and the dense forestation, to smoke out the last
of the foe.
There were a few early successes: enclaves of cultists, some well-armed, dug into bolt-holes and lodges, making
a last stand. Then, after a week, as they reached the colder, higher plateaux and the real thickness of the fern-cover, a
working pattern developed. Mkoll would plan recon sweeps each day, deploying a couple of dozen scouts in a wide
fan into the thickets. They would quarter each area and report back, signalling in the main Ghost forces if contact
was made.
Perhaps they had become lazy, complacent. Major Rawne averred that they had silenced the last of the enemy and
were now wasting their time and patience cutting deeper and deeper into the lonely territories of the hinterland. The
commissar himself seemed devoted to discharging the task properly, but even he had doubled the reach and range of
the scout sweeps. Another few days and they would quit, he had told Mkoll.
This day, this high cold windy day, with the ever present whisper of the ferns, the scouts had gone deeper and
wider into the hills. There had been no contact with anything for two whole sweeps. Mkoll sensed that less
dedicated troopers like Dewr were getting slack with the routine.
But he himself had seen things that kept him sharp and made him determined to press on. Things he had reported to
Gaunt to convince him to work the forests a little longer: broken paths in the vegetation; trampled areas; torn,
apparently random trails in the underbrush. There was something still out here.
They crossed the valley floor and came up the shaded side, where the ferns listed restlessly, like shadow-fans.
Every dozen or so steps, Dewr’s feet cracked a thorn or a seed case, or chinked a rock, no matter how delicately he
walked. He cursed every sound. He was determined to prove his ability to Mkoll. And he had no clue how Mkoll
moved so silently, like he was floating.
The ferns hissed in the wind.
Mkoll stopped to check his compact chart and referred his eyes to sun and compass. Within a quarter of an hour
their circuit should bring them into contact with Rafel and Waed, on a mirror sweep towards them.
Mkoll suddenly held up a hand and Dewr stopped sharp. The scout sergeant fanned his fingers twice to indicate
Dewr should cover, and the other slid in low beside a thick fern stem, knelt and raised his lasgun. There was dust on
the exchanger and he wiped it off. Dust in his eyes too, and he wiped them. He braced and then took aim, rolling it
left and right as Mkoll advanced.
Mkoll dropped down another few metres and found another torn trail in the fem. As wide as three men walking
abreast, ferns uprooted or snapped and trampled. Mkoll gingerly touched one sappy, broken twist of stalk. It was as
thick as his thigh, and the bark was tough as iron. He could not have severed it this clean even with a wood axe. He
checked the ground. Trample marks, deep and wide, like giant footsteps. The trail snaked away both ahead and
behind as far as he could see, uneven, weaving. Mkoll raised three fingers and circled them. Dewr advanced to join
him.
The younger man looked at the trail, questions in his mouth, but the look in Mkoll’s eyes told him not to ask them.
Not to say anything. There was no sound at all except the hissing of the fronds. Dewr knelt and looked at the trail for
himself. Something… someone… big, moving blindly. His fingers touched something buried in the ashy soil and he
plucked it out. A chunk of blackened metal, part of the rim of something, large as a cupped hand. He held it out to
Mkoll. The sergeant took it with genuine interest, studied it, and tucked it into his thigh pouch. He nodded a firm
acknowledgement to Dewr for his sharp eyes. Dewr felt greater pride in that fleeting moment Than he had ever done
in his life before. Or would again.
They moved on, down the trail line, following the bent-forward fronds which indicated the direction of motion.
After sixty metres, the trail veered uphill. Mkoll stopped and wiped his weapon again.
A scream cut the air, as bright and sharp as a Tanith blade. They both started. It shut off abruptly, but while it
lasted it had been unmistakably human. Mkoll was moving in an instant, following the source of the sound. Dewr
went after him, trying to keep his hurried steps silent. They moved off the trail into the thickets. Ahead, the foliage
changed. Under the crest of the slope, thicker, spined cacti grew in clusters; fibrous, gourd-like growths lined with
long needles were arrayed down each seam of the plant sac. There were hundreds of the plants, some knee high,
some higher and fatter than a man, a forest of needle-studded bulbs.
Another, weaker scream came, as from a man waking from a nightmare and abruptly dying away as he realised it
was but a dream. And another sound, close on the heels of the scream. A hollow, plosive, spitting sound, like
someone retching fruit pits from his throat.
They found Rafel crumpled amid the gourd-bulbs. A trail of blood, bright spatters on the ashy ground, showed
where he had dropped and how he had crawled. Over a dozen needles, some more than a foot long, impaled him.
One went through his eye into his brain. Dewr, in horror, was about to speak, but Mkoll whirled and clamped his
hand over the younger man’s mouth. Mkoll pointed to the nearest of the large cactus growths, indicating where a line
of spines were absent, leaving only a line of sap-drooling orifices.
“I say again, Trooper Rafel! What is your position?” The voice crackled out of the corpse’s intercom. Mkoll
drove himself into Dewr, knocking him aside, away from Rafel as the three bulbs nearest the body shuddered and
spat spines. A salvo of those hollow spitting coughs again. Needles stabbed into Rafel’s corpse like arrows and
bounced off the ground around them.
One went through Dewr’s shin. He wanted to scream but managed to master it. The pain was sharp, then dull. His
leg went cold. Mkoll rolled off him. Dewr pointed feebly at his leg, but the sergeant seemed to ignore it. He made a
quick adjustment to the intercom at his collar and then reached down to Dewr’s, switching it off.
Only then did he turn to the wound. He took out his knife and cut the cloth away from Dewr’s shin, slicing the
straps holding the chain-cloth bandages in place. The needle had passed right through the chain, directly through the
eye of some links and severing others. Mkoll turned the knife round and forced the hilt into Dewr’s mouth.
Instinctively, Dewr bit down and Mkoll yanked the needle free.
There was very little blood. That was bad. The blood was clotting and turning yellow fast and the sticky residue
on the spine suggested venom. But the needle had only punctured flesh, which was good. The force of it could have
shattered the shin bone.
Dewr bit hard on the hilt a while longer. As the pain ebbed, he slackened his mouth and the knife slid out down his
cheek onto the ground. Mkoll rose. He would get Rafel’s field dressings and bind the wound. Rafel wouldn’t need
them now. He turned. His foot cracked a thorn on the ground. A moment of carelessness, triggered by his concern for
Dewr. A bulb shuddered at the crack and spat a needle. It passed through the stock of Mkoll’s lasgun and the point
stopped an inch from his belly.
He unfroze and breathed, then pulled it out. Mkoll crossed to Rafel and freed his field dressing pouch, pinned to
his waist by another needle through the strap. He returned to Dewr and bound the wound.
Dewr’s head began to spin. It was an easy, fluid feeling, like his cares were ebbing away. There was a gnawing
feeling in his leg and hip, but it was somehow pleasant.
Mkoll saw the vacant glaze coming over Dewr’s eyes. Unceremoniously, he took another length of gauze dressing
and jammed it into Dewr’s mouth, taping the gag tightly in place. A delirious man may not realise the sound he is
making.
He was about to lift Dewr onto his shoulder when another sound came. A ripping and crashing, distant at first,
accompanied by the relentless retching spit of the bulbs as the tearing sound set them off. Something was coming,
something drawn by Rafel’s last scream. Something gigantic.
As it burst into the clearing, all of the cacti around them spontaneously shed their needles in a blitz of venomous
barbs. The fusillade rattled off the metal carapace and legs. Mkoll threw himself over Dewr and they lay there, silent
and still under the storm of darts.
The Chaos dreadnought came to a halt on its great hydraulic feet, sighing and hissing. There was a stench of heat
and a throb of electromagnetic power that prickled the hairs on Mkoll’s neck. It was four metres tall, wider than
three men, blackened and scorched as if it had walked through hell and back. All signs of paint or insignia had been
burnt off, to bare metal in some places. A malign presence oozed from it, filling the atmosphere. Such a great
machine was terrifying enough in itself, but the malevolent feeling of it… Mkoll felt his gorge rise and clamped his
jaws. Dewr seemed unconscious.
The dreadnought took a step forward, almost tentative and dainty though the great steel hoof shook the earth as it
fell and triggered another volley of spines. Its body rotated as if scanning, and it took another step. Another plankplank
of rebounding spines.
It was blind. Mkoll could see that at a glance. The wounds of the Adeptus Astartes were deep and fearful across
its visor. Its optical units had been blown away in some great act. Mkoll knew the semi-circle of burnt metal Dewr
had found was from the recess socket of one of its eyes. It had been blundering around the fern forests for days,
hunting by sound alone.
Another step. Another hiss of pistons and a growl of motivator. Another thump of footfall, and other rain of darts.
It was only three metres from them now, still cranking its body around, listening.
Dewr started and woke up. He saw the dreadnought — and his filmy, poisoned eyes made even greater nightmares
out of the existing one. He convulsed and screamed. Despite the gauze gag, the scream was fierce and high pitched,
strangulated and horrible through the choke.
Mkoll knew he had an instant to react, even as Dewr stirred. He dived aside.
The dreadnought swung and targeted the source of the scream as rapidly as the plants around them did. Poison
needles spat into a body that had, mere microseconds before, been incinerated by a belching plasma gun.
Needles rattled off the dreadnought again.
Mkoll moved low, sliding round the bulk of the bulbs, trying to keep the listening death machine in sight. His heart
was thumping. He cursed it for being so loud.
Behind the next break of growth, he slid in low and checked his weapon. There were fern fronds caught in the
trigger. He thought at once to pull them free and then stopped. It would make a sound, and what was the use? What
good would a lasgun be against that?
He moved again, his foot skittering a stone. Needles spat ineffectually. The dreadnought began to move, following
the sound, walking through rains of needles that convulsed and flew at each footfall.
Mkoll thought to run. It was blind, the plants were blind. If he could only stay silent — and that was his gift — he
could slip away and take the information to Gaunt. But would they find it again? Out here, in such a wilderness? It
could take weeks to relocate the dreadnought, the lives of many to neutralise it. If he could only…
No. Madness. Suicide.
Then he heard the voice. Distant. It was Waed, calling for Rafel. He was beyond the needle bulbs, searching,
querying why Rafel had stopped transmitting. In moments, surely, he would be triggering needles.
Or summoning the dreadnought. Already, the blind beast had turned and begun to stride through the thicket,
crushing the spitting cactus to ochre mash.
Mkoll had seconds to think. He would not lose another of his scout cadre, not like this.
He took out a grenade, primed it and threw it left. The crump took out a cluster of bulbs in a spray of fire and
matted fibres, and caused a flurry of spines to shoot. Mkoll then headed directly for the blast site. He slid in with his
back to one of the bulbs that had triggered at the sound of the explosion. Its needle apertures were spent. He could
use it as cover safely now it was unarmed.
The dreadnought was thumping his way, drawn by the sound of the grenade. Waed had fallen silent.
Mkoll adjusted his gun and set it on the ground. Then he spoke.
“Over here, you bastard!”
It sounded impossibly loud. A final taunt to follow the grenade. Bulbs popped around him. But none had spines
left on the sides facing him.
The dreadnought crunched into the clearing. Its left foot clinked against something in the dust. It bent to retrieve it.
Mkoll’s lasgun.
The dreadnought raised it in its bionic claws, holding the gun up to its already ruptured frontal armour as if to sniff
or taste it.
Mkoll started to run.
By his estimation, there were five seconds before the lasgun magazine overloaded as he had set it. He threw
himself flat as it went off. Hundreds of cacti loosed needles at the roar. Then silence.
With Waed, silently, Mkoll re-entered the thicket. They found the dreadnought broken open in the blackened clearing.
The overload had not killed it, but it had split its armour as the towering machine had strode forward. Poison darts
had done the rest, puncturing and killing the now-vulnerable once-man inside. Mkoll could see where the maddened
Chaos beast-machine had strode arrogantly on for a few heavy steps after the puny laser blast. Then it had toppled,
poisoned, dead.
They headed back onto the trail.
“You’re a fething hero!” Waed said finally.
“How is that?”
“A fething dreadnought, Mkoll! You killed a dreadnought!” Mkoll turned and faced Waed with a look that brooked
no denial.
“We’ll tell the commissar that the area is cleared. Understood? I don’t want any stupid glory. Is that clear?”
Waed nodded and followed his sergeant. “But you killed it…” he ventured softly.
“No, I didn’t. I listened and waited and was silent… and when I made the opening, Ramillies did the rest.”
FOUR
THE HOLLOWS OF HELL
Colm Corbec was sat outside his habitat unit. As regimental second officer, he was given a bivouac like Gaunt’s, but
the commissar knew that he preferred to sleep in the open.
As Gaunt approached, he saw that Corbec was whittling a piece of bark with his Tanith knife. Gaunt slowed and
watched the thick-set man. If he himself died, Gaunt mused, could Corbec hold them together? Could he lead the
Ghosts with Gaunt gone?
Corbec would say “no”, Gaunt knew, but he was confident of Corbec’s abilities. Even though he had chosen his
second in command on a decision that was as simple as a flick of a coin.
“Quiet night,” Corbec said as Gaunt crouched next to him and his fire.
“So far,” Gaunt replied. He watched the big man’s hands play the blade over the pale wood. He knew Corbec
hated the role of command, would do almost anything to distract himself. Gaunt also knew that Corbec hated
ordering men to their deaths or glories. But he did it well. And he took charge when it was needed. Never more so,
than on Caligula…
He would be sick. Very soon, very violently. Of this sole fact, Brin Milo was absolutely sure.
His stomach somersaulted as the troop-ship plunged out of the sky, and every bone in his body shook as the
impossibly steep descent vibrated the sixty-tonne vessel like a child’s rattle.
Count… …think happy thoughts… …distract yourself… …counselled a part of his mind in desperation. It won’t
look good if the commissar’s aide, the regimental piper, wonderboy and all round lucky bloody charm hurls his
reconstituted freeze-dried ready-pulped food rations all over the deck.
And whatever you do, don’t think about how pulpy and slimy those food rations were… advised another, urgent
part of his brain.
Deck? What deck? wailed another. Chuck now and it’ll wobble out in free fall and— Shut up! Brin Milo ordered
his seething imagination.
For a moment, he was calm, He breathed deeply to loosen and relax, to centre himself, as Trooper Larkin had
taught him during marksman training.
Then a tiny little black-hearted voice in his head piped up: Don’t worry about puking. You’ll be incinerated in a
hypervelocity crash-landing any second now.
Like pepper falling from a mill, thought Executive Officer Kreff, gazing down out of the vast observation blister
below the prow of the escort frigate, Navarre.
Behind him, on the raised bridge, there was a murmur as the systems operators and servitors softly relayed data
back and forth. Control systems hummed. The air was cool. Occasionally, the low, reverential voices of the senior
helm officers would announce another order from the ship’s captain, who lurked alone, inscrutable, in his private
strategium, an armoured dome at the heart of the bridge.
The frigate’s bridge was Kreff’s favourite place in the universe. It was hushed like a chapel and always serene,
even though it controlled a starship capable of crossing parsecs in a blink, a starship with the firepower to roast
cities.
He returned to his study of the vast bright bulk of Caligula below him, plump and puffy like an orange, speckled
with white-green blotches of mould.
Imperial starships hung in the blackness between it and him: some vast, grey and vaulted like cathedrals twenty
kilometres long, some bloated like oceanic titans; others long, lean and angular like his own frigate. They floated in
the sea of space and tiny black dots, thousands upon thousands of dots, tumbled out of them, fluttering down towards
the ripe planet.
Kreff knew the dots were troop-ships: each speck was a two-hundred tonne dropcraft loaded with combat-ready
troops. But they looked just like pepper ground from a mill. As if the Imperial fleet had come by to politely season
Caligula.
Kreff wondered which of the pepper grains contained Commissar Gaunt. Things had certainly livened up since
Gaunt had arrived: Ibram Gaunt, the notorious, decorated war hero, and the rag-tag regiment known as the Ghosts
that he had salvaged from the murdered planet Tanith.
Kreff smoothed the emerald trim of his Segmentum Pacificus Fleet uniform and sighed. When he had first heard the
Navarre had been assigned to Gaunt’s mob, he had been dismayed. But true to his track record, Gaunt had shaped the
so-called Ghosts up and taken them through several courageous actions.
It had been an education having him aboard. As executive officer, the official representative of the captain in all
shipboard organisational matters, he’d had to mix with the Ghosts more than other Navy personnel. He’d got to know
them: as well as anyone could know a band of black-haired, raucous, tattooed soldiers, the last survivors from a
planet that Chaos had destroyed. He’d been almost afraid of them at first, alarmed by their fierce physicality. Kreff
knew war as a silent, detached, long-distance discipline, a chess-game measured in thousands of kilometres and
degrees of orbit. They knew war as a bloody, wearying, frenzied, close-up blur.
He’d been invited to several dinners in the Guard mess, and spent one strange, only partially-remembered evening
in the company of Corbec, the regiment’s colonel, a hirsute giant of a man who had, on closer inspection, a noble
soul. Or so it had seemed after several bottles and hours of loose, earnest talk. They had debated the tactics of war,
comparing their own schools and methods. Kreff had been dismissive of Corbec’s brutal, primitive ethos, boasting
of the high art that was Navy fleet warfare.
Corbec had not been insulted. He’d grinned and promised Kreff would get to fight a real war one day.
The thought made Kreff smile. His eyes went back to the dots falling towards the planet and the smile faded.
Now he doubted he would see either Gaunt or Corbec again.
Far away, below, he could see the scorching flashes of anti-orbit guns, barking up at the fluttering pepper grains.
That was a dog’s life, going down there into the mouth of hell. All that noise and death and mayhem.
Kreff sighed again, and felt suddenly grateful for the tranquil bridge around him. This was the only way to fight
wars, he decided.
Milo opened his eyes, but it hadn’t gone away. The world was still convulsing. He glanced about, down the hold of
the troopship where another twenty-five Guardsmen sat rigid, clamped in place by the yellow-striped restraint rigs,
their equipment shuddering in mesh packs under every seat. The air was sweet with incense, and the ship was
shaking so hard that he could not read the inspirational inscriptions etched on the cabin walls. Milo heard the roaring
of the outer hull, white-hot from the steep dive. What he couldn’t hear was the booming cough of the anti-orbit
batteries down below, welcoming them.
He glanced around for a friendly face. Hulking Bragg was gripping his restraints tight, his eyes closed. Young
Trooper Caffran, only three years older than Milo, was gazing at the roof, muttering a charm or prayer. Across from
him, Milo found the hard eyes of Major Rawne.
Rawne smiled and nodded his head encouragingly.
Milo took a breath. Being encouraged by Major Rawne in these circumstances was like being patted on the back
by the Devil at the gates of Hell.
Milo shut his eyes again.
In the rear of the slender cockpit, strapped in his G-chair, Commissar Gaunt craned his neck round to see past the
pilots and the astropath and look through the narrow front ports. Chart displays flickered across the thick glass and
the ship was bucking wildly, but Gaunt could see the target coming up: the hive city called Nero, poking up out of the
ochre soil through a caldera ninety kilometres wide, like an encrusted lump of coal set in a plump navel.
“Sixty seconds to landfall,” the pilot said calmly. His voice was electronically tonal as it rasped via the intercom.
Gaunt pulled out his bolt pistol and cocked it. He started counting down.
High above the sunken city of Nero, the troop-ships came down like bullets, scorching in out of the cloud banks.
Anti-air batteries thumped the sky.
Then the cotton-white clouds began to singe. The fluffy corners scorched and wilted. A dark purple stain leached
into the sky, billowing through the cumulus like blood through water. Lightning fizzed and lashed.
Leagues above, Kreff paused and stared. Something was discolouring the atmosphere far below. “What the—” he
began.
“Weather formation!” the co-pilot yelped, frantically making adjustments. “We’re hitting hail and lightning.”
Gaunt was about to query further but the shaking had increased. He glanced round at the astropath, suddenly aware
that the man was uttering a low, monotone growl.
He was just in time to see the astropath’s head explode. Blood and tissue painted the pilot, co-pilot, Gaunt and the
entire cabin interior.
The pilot was screaming a question.
It was a psychic storm, Gaunt was horribly sure. Far below them, something of unimaginable daemonic power
was trying to keep them out, trying to ward off the assault with a boiling tempest of Chaos.
The ship was shaking so hard now Gaunt could no longer focus. Multiple warning nines flashed up in series
across the main control display, blurring into scarlet streaks before his rattling eyes.
Something, somewhere exploded.
The vibration and the shrieking didn’t stop, but they changed. Milo suddenly knew that they were no longer crash
diving into attack. They were simply crash-diving.
He wasn’t feeling sick anymore. But the wicked incincerated-in-a-hypervelocity-crashlanding-voice started to
crow: I told you so.
There was impact…
…so huge, it felt like every one of his joints had dislocated.
There was sliding…
…sudden, shuddering, terrifying.
And finally…
…there was roaring fire.
And, as if as an afterthought…
…complete excruciating blackness.
Hundreds of Imperial troop-ships were already well below the cloudbank when the psychic typhoon exploded into
life, and so escaped the worst of its effects, levelling out, they descended on the massive citadel of Nero Hive like a
plague of locusts. The air was thick with them, ringing with the roar of their thrusters as they banked in and settled on
the wasteland outskirts of the towering black city-hive. Traceries of laser and plasma fire divided the sky in a
thousand places, making it look for all the world like some insanely complex set of blueprints. Some struck landing
ships which flared, fluttered and died. Flak shells sent loud, black flowers up into the air. Marauder air-support
shrieked in at intervals, moving in close, low formations like meteorites hunting as a pack, strafing the ground with
stitching firestorms.
Above it all, the purple sky boiled and thrashed and spat electric ribbons.
At ground level, Colonel Colm Corbec of the Tanith First-and-Only led his squad down the ramp of the troop-ship
and into the firezone. To either side, he could see lines of ships disgorging their troops into the field, a tide of men
ten thousand strong.
They reached the first line of cover — a punctured length of pipeline running along rusted pylons — and dropped
down.
Corbec took a look each way and keyed in his micro-bead comm link. “Corbec to squad. Sound off.”
Voices chatted back along the link, responding.
By Corbec’s side, Trooper Larkin was cradling his lasgun and looking up at the sky with trembling fear.
“Oh, this is bad,” he murmured. “Psyker madness, very bad. We may think we had it hard at Voltis Watergate or
Blackshard deadzone, but they’ll seem like a stroll round the garden next to this…”
“Larks!” Corbec hissed. “For Feth’s sake, shut up! Haven’t you never heard of morale?”
Larkin turned his bony, weasel face to his senior officer and old friend in genuine surprise. “It’s okay, colonel!” he
insisted. “I didn’t have me comm link turned on! Nobody heard!”
Corbec grimaced. “I heard, and you’re scaring the crap out of me.”
They all ducked down as a swathe of autocannon fire chewed across the lines. Someone a few hundred metres
away started screaming. They could hear the piercing shrieks over the roar of the storm and the landing troop-ships
and the bombardment.
Just.
“Where’s the commissar?” Corbec growled. “He insisted he was going to lead us in.”
“If he ain’t landed, he ain’t coming,” Larkin said, looking up at the sky. “We were the last few to make it through
before that happened.”
Next to Larkin, Trooper Raglon, the squad’s communications officer, looked up from the powerful voxcaster set.
“No contact from the commissar’s dropcraft, sir. I’ve been scanning the orbital traffic and the Navy band, colonel.
This filthy psyker storm took out a whole heap of troopships. They’re still counting the crash fires. We was lucky we
got down before it really started.”
Corbec shivered. He didn’t feel lucky.
Raglon went on: “Our psykers upstairs are trying to break the storm, but…”
“But what?”
“It looks pretty certain the commissar’s troop-ship was one of those vaporised in the storm.”
Corbec growled something indistinct. He felt cold, and could see the look on the faces of his men as the word
spread down the line.
Corbec lifted his lasgun and keyed up his micro-bead. He had to rally them fast, get them moving. “What are you
waiting for?” he bawled. “Diamond formation fire-team spread! Double time! Fire at will! Advance! For the
memory of Tanith! Advance!” Brin Milo woke up.
He was upside down, blind, suspended painfully from his restraint rig, his ribs bruised blue and a taste of blood
in his mouth.
But — unless someone was about to play a really nasty trick on him — he was alive.
He could hear… very little. The trickle and patter of falling water. A creaking. Someone moaning softly.
There was a loud bang and light flared into his dark-accustomed eyes. He smelled thermite and realised someone
had just ejected the emergency hull-plates using the explosive bolts. Daylight —thin, green, wet daylight — streamed
in.
Bragg’s huge face swam up in front of Milo’s, upside down.
“Hang on, Brinny-boy,” Bragg said softly. “Soon have you down.” He started rattling the restraints and slamming
the lock handle back and forth.
The restraints abruptly stopped restraining and Milo uttered a little yelp as he dropped two and a half metres onto
the sloping roof of the troop-ship.
“Sorry,” Bragg said, helping him up. “You hurt, lad?”
Milo shook his head. “Where are we?” he asked.
Bragg paused as if he was thinking about this carefully, Then, with deliberation, he said “We’re earlobe deep in
doo-doo.”
The troop-ship, now just a crumpled sleeve of metal, had impacted at a steep angle on its roof.
Milo climbed down and gazed back up at the mangled wreck. What amazed him only slightly less than the fact he
was still alive, was that they had come down in what appeared to be a jungle. Enormous pinkish trees that looked
like swollen, magnified root vegetables, formed a dense forest of flaccid trunks around them. The huge growths were
strung with thick ropey vines, creepers and flowering tendrils, and thorny fern and horsetail covered the moist,
steaming ground. Everything was green, as all light — except for a single clear shaft which slanted down through the
trees where the troop-ship had burst through — was filtered by the dense canopy of foliage above their heads. It was
humid, and sticky, and sappy water dripped from the trees. There was a sweet stink of fungoid flowers.
Bragg clambered down from the wreck, and joined the boy. A dozen other Ghosts had clambered out and were sat
down or leaning against trees, waiting for spinning heads and ringing ears to clear. All had minor cuts and scrapes,
except Trooper Obel who lay on a makeshift stretcher, his chest bloody and torn. Corporal Meryn had taken charge.
He and Caffran were trying to open other emergency hatches to look for more survivors.
Milo saw Rawne had survived. The major stood to one side with a tall, pale Ghost called I’eygor, who served as
his aide.
“I didn’t know there were any jungles on this world,” Milo said.
“Me neither,” Bragg answered. He was catching and piling equipment packs Meryn was tossing down from the
side of the wreck. “Actually, I didn’t even know what this world was called.”
Milo found Rawne by his side.
“We’re in a forest hollow,” Rawne said. “The surface of Caligula is barren pumice, but it’s punctured in many
places by deep rift basins, many of them old craters or volcanic sinks. The cities are built down into the largest of
them, but others sustain microclimates wet enough for these forests. I think some of them were actually farmed…
before the fething enemy came in.”
“So… where are we?” I’eygor asked.
Rawne rubbed his throat, thoughtful. “We’ve come down a good way off target. I think there were some forest
calderas north of Nero. On the wrong side of the lines.”
I’eygor swore.
“I think the major is correct,” said a voice.
Gaunt appeared, sliding down from a side vent in the punctured hull. He was tattered and bruised, with blood
soaking the shoulder and side of his tunic under his coat. Meryn hurried over to him to assist.
“Not me,” Gaunt said, waving him off. “The co-pilot’s alive and he needs to be cut free.”
“It’s a miracle anyone got out of that front end,” Meryn said with a whistle.
Gaunt crossed to Milo, Rawne and the others.
“Report, major,” he said.
“Unless we find anyone else alive in there, we’ve got twelve able-bodied men, plus yourself, the boy Milo and
the co-pilot. Minor injuries all round, though Trooper Grogan has a broken arm. But he can walk. Obel has chest
injuries. Pretty bad. Brennan is inside. He’s a real mess and pinned, but he’s alive. The rest are pulp.”
Rawne looked up at the wreck. “Lucky shot got us, I guess. Missile—”
“Psykers!” Gaunt growled. “They threw some freakshow storm up. Smashed us out of the sky.”
Everyone fell silent at the thought. Fear prickled them. Some looked away, uneasy and shaken.
Gaunt crossed to the pile of equipment packs Bragg and Caffran were offloading and opened a compact carry-box.
Out of this he slid a topolabe from its cushioned slot and held it up by the knurled handgrip. The small brass machine
whirred and the concentric dials span and clicked as the gravimetric gyros turned in the glass bubble of inert gas.
After a moment, the machine chimed and published a readout on a back-lit blue display.
“We’re in a forest caldera called K7-75, about forty kilometres north north east of the Nero city perimeter. Your
assessment was good, major. We’re on the wrong side of the lines and in pretty damn inhospitable country. There’s
dense forest for at least eight kilometres in any direction, and this sinkhole’s about a kilometre deep. We’d better get
ready to move.”
“Move?” Feygor asked. “Commissar… we can get the crash beacon up and running…”
“No we can’t,” Meryn said. He showed them the molten residue of the beacon unit.
“And even if we could, Feygor?” Gaunt shook his head sadly. “About fifty kilometres south of us, the Imperial
Guard is engaged in a massive assault. Thousands are dying. Every ship, and craft and man is committed to the
attack. There will be nothing to spare to come looking — across enemy lines, mark you — for a few lost souls like
us. They’ll have already written us off. Besides, there’s a psyker-bred storm raging up there, remember? No one
could get to us even if they wanted to.”
Rawne spat and cursed. “So what do we do?” Gaunt grinned, but without humour. “We see how far we can get.
Better that than just wait here to die.”
In fifteen minutes, the survivors were assembled and injuries tended. Salvageable equipment and weapons were
divided up. Both Milo and the dazed co-pilot were given a laspistol and a few spare power cells. Obel and the nowfreed
Brennan lay unconscious on stretcher pallets.
Rawne looked grimly at Gaunt. He nodded his head at the two injured men. “We should… be merciful.”
Gaunt frowned. “We’re taking them with us.”
Rawne shook his head. “With respect, they’ll probably both be dead in an hour. Taking them will tie up four ablebodied
soldiers as stretcher bearers.”
“We’re taking them,” Gaunt repeated.
“If you lashed ’em both to a frame,” Bragg put in thoughtfully, “I could drag ’em along. Better me than four other
boys.”
Meryn and Feygor raised the two stretcher cases onto an A-frame of wood and Bragg took the weight of the point
on his shoulder. Caffran had used his silver Tanith knife to cut lengths of waxy creeper and bound them on for a grip.
“I won’t be fast, mind,” Bragg noted. But with the party clearing the way, he could pull them along on the slingbed
efficiently enough.
The commissar checked the topolabe again, scanning for closer detail.
“Interesting,” he murmured. “About four kilometres east there’s some kind of structure. Maybe an old farming
complex or something. Might provide us with some shelter. Let’s see.” Gaunt had armed himself with a lasgun from
one of the dead. He handed his chainsword to Rawne. “Take point please, major,” he said.
Rawne moved to the head of the column and started to slice his way through the dense, wet forest.
The Tanith Ghosts advanced through the outer complexes of the hive city, surging down an embankment and across
the blasted ferrocrete of a six-lane arterial highway.
Broken vehicles littered the lanes, and great pools of motor oil blazed up curtains of fire. Corbec urged the Ghosts
forward, under traffic control boards that still flashed and winked speed limits and direction pointers. Guns blazing,
they began to assault a vast block of worker residences on the far side.
As the battle group swept into the shattered hallways of the old worker residences, where peeling placards
exhorted the citizen workers to meet production targets and praise the Emperor at all times, fighting became a closequarter
business with the enemy forces, now seen face to face for the first time. Humans, corrupted by Chaos, cult
worshippers whose physical forms had become twisted and warped. Most wore the black, vulcanised work suits of
the hive workforce, daubed now with Chaos patterns, their heads protected with tight grey hoods and industrial glare
visors. They were well armed too.
Bodies littered the concourses and galleries of the residences, shattered glass and twisted plastic covered the
ground. Intense fires blazed through some areas, and the air was full of drifting cinders, like incandescent snow.
And flies: dark, fat-bodied flies.
Blasting as he advanced, Corbec fired to left and right, through doorways and thin plastic-board walls, cutting
down or exploding the foe all around.
Flanked in a fire-team, Larkin, Suth, Varl, Mallor, Durcan and Billad worked in immediate support. Larkin
snatched off the occasional shot, his aim as fine as usual, though Corbec knew that thanks to the storm, he was closer
to snapping than ever. Suth had the squad’s melta, and seared them a path.
Bolt fire and las-shot cut their way. Billad jerked as he was hit repeatedly, sprawling back against a wall and
sliding down.
Corbec sent a steady stream of shot into the smoke haze.
The flies buzzed.
Radio chatter was almost as deafening as the firefight. Guard forces had begun to pincer the city. A combined
force of Royal Volpone 50th and Raymian 13th and 16th had driven a steel fist into the ore-smelter heartland of the
hive, meeting the enemy’s main motorised units in an armoured battle in the vast, echoing barns of the starship yards
and dry-docks. Rumours were a battalion of Lakkarii Gundogs and some Raven Guard Space Marines had punched
through into the upper levels, into the Administratum tower itself.
But an overall victory seemed so far away, especially given the psychic storm, which effectively shut off any
further reinforcements. Or anything else.
“Any joy with the air-cover?” Corbec asked over the crackle of laser fire.
Trooper Raglon answered on the bead-link. “Marauder flights are all out of action, sir. Fleet Command recalled
them because of the storm. The Chaos effects are screwing their guidance.”
Corbec glanced up at the corrosive purple turbulence that passed for sky. Forget the aircraft, that nightmare was
screwing with his guidance. This close to a manifestation of Chaos, his senses were whirling. His balance was shot
and he felt nauseous, with a throbbing pain in his temple. Terror dimpled his skin and ached in his marrow. He dared
not think about what was out there, waiting for him.
And he knew his men were the same. There had been a dozen spontaneous nosebleeds already, and several men
had convulsed, vomiting.
Still, they were making headway, clawing through the grim habitat towers and the workforce residence blocks
where things came down to knife and pistol, room to room, in the old, dirty tenements where the lowest level of
worker had dwelt.
The commissar would have been proud, Corbec thought. The Ghosts had done the job. He spat out a fly and
listened carefully to the flow of radio traffic again for a moment. The Fleet Command channel repeated its overriding
directive: unless the enemy psykers could be neutralised, the Fleet couldn’t land any more reinforcements, any more
of the five million Imperial Guard troops still waiting in troop-ships in orbit. Or deploy air-cover. The fate of the
entire battle teetered in the balance.
Corbec brushed off another fly. The air was thick with them now, choked with flies and cinders and ash. The smell
was unbearable. Colm Corbec took a deep, shuddering breath. He knew the signs: they were close to something,
something bad. Something of Chaos.
“Watch yourselves!” he warned his group over the link. “We’re getting into a real nest of Hell here!”
Through the swarming clouds of buzzing flies, the fire-team edged along a corridor littered with clear plastic
shards and torn paper. Out in the concourse below, a fierce hand-to-hand battle was ending in screams and sporadic
pistol fire. Something blew up a kilometre or so away, shaking the ground.
Corbec reached the turn in the hall and waved his men back.
Just in time, his fire-team sheltered in doorways as heavy stub gun fire raked up and down the old back-stairway,
disintegrating the steps and tearing down the stained wall tiles.
Corbec looked round at Larkin, who was murmuring some Imperial Prayer under his breath, waving off the flies. It
was probably the oath of allegiance to the Emperor they’d all been taught at school back home on Tanith.
Home…
This had once been someone’s home, thought Corbec, snapping back to the hard facts of real time. A dingy old
hallway in a dingy old high rise, where humble, hardworking people came back from the shift-work at the fabrication
plants in the hive and cooked meagre meals for their tired children.
“Larks!” He gestured up the stairwell. “A little Mad Magic on that stubbed.”
Larkin wiped his mouth and shook out his neck like a pianist about to play. He took out his nightscope, a little
heat-sensitive spotter he’d used back home poaching larisel out in the woods at night. He trained it up the hall, found
a hub of heat emanating from the wall.
Most would have aimed for that, thinking it the body heat of the gunner. Larkin knew better. The source was the
muzzle heat of the big cannon. That put the gunner about sixty centimetres behind it, to the left.
“A bottle of sacra says it’s a head shot,” whispered Corbec as he saw Larkin snuggle down and aim his lasgun.
“Done,” Varl said.
Larkin punched a single shot up the stairwell and through the wall.
They moved forward, cautious at first, but there was no further firing.
Covering each other, they moved up the smashed staircase, past the landing where the cult soldier lay dead across
his stub gun, head half gone. Corbec smiled and Varl sighed.
Then they entered a further landing and fanned out. There was a smell of burning flesh here, and the flies were
thicker than ever.
Larkin edged along one wall, looking at the trash and broken possessions that had been dropped in the rubble.
Along the wall, under a series of Chaos markings rendered in dark paint, someone had nailed up a series of dolls and
other childrens’ toys. Something in Larkin’s heart broke as he gazed on the crucified dolls, remembering a world of
family and friends and children forever lost to him.
Then he realised that not all of the dolls were dolls.
Larkin fell to his knees, retching.
On the far side of the gallery, Corbec, Durcan and Suth burst into a long concrete chamber that had once been a
central meeting hall for the tenement block. It was dark inside. Several thousand eyes blinked in their direction.
They all belonged to the same… thing.
Something immeasurably vast began to coil up out of the darkness, extending the flaccid, blue-white mass of its
bloated body, toxic spittle drooling from its befanged mouths. Jellied things quivered in the dark spaces of its
translucent skin and flies billowed around it like a cloak.
Corbec’s nose spurted blood and soaked his beard as he backed away, his mind seized in horror. Suth dropped the
melta with a clatter and started to retch, sliding down the wall, unable to stand. Durcan seemed unable to move. He
began to cry, wailing as he fumbled to raise his lasgun. Limpid, greasy coils lashed out of the dark chamber and
encircled him, embraced him, and then crushed him so hard and so suddenly he burst like a tomato.
Mallor and Varl turned and saw the horror slithering up from the chamber, saw Suth helpless and Corbec frozen,
saw the pulpy red slick that had been Durcan.
“Daemon! Daemon!” Varl screamed down the comm link. “DALMON!”
Gaunt held up a hand and announced a ten minute rest. The group eased back and took the weight off their feet,
leaning on tree trunks, hunkering down.
Meryn took the medi-pack back to Bragg and helped him lower the stretcher-bed.
“Oh, feth!” Milo heard him say.
Milo crossed over as Gaunt himself approached.
Meryn looked up, treating the ugly wounds of the two unconscious men. “It’s this place,” he explained, “hot,
wet… spores in the air… insects. Their wounds gel re-infected as fast as I clean them. Obel’s fading fast. Some kind
of fungus necrotizing the raw flesh. Maggots too.” He shook his head and continued with his work.
Milo moved away. The smell rising from the wounded men was not pleasant.
Nearby stood the co-pilot. He’d pulled his flight helmet off, and was staring nervously into the green darkness
around them, clutching his laspistol. Milo thought he looked young, no older than him. The flesh around his cranial
implants looked raw and fresh. He probably feels just like me, Milo decided. In over his head.
He had just considered approaching the navy cadet and speaking to him when the low whine of gunfire sang
through the trees. Everyone ducked for cover, and there was a staccato series of safety locks disengaging and powercells
humming to life.
Near to Milo, Gaunt crawled forward, tapping his micro-bead.
“Rawne? Answer!” he hissed. The major, with Feygor, Caffran and a trooper called Kalen, had scouted ahead
towards the mysterious structure.
“F’irefight!” came Rawne’s response, Milo picking it up via his own comm-bead. “We’re pinned! Daagh! Throne
of Earth! There’s—”
The link went dead.
“Damn!” Gaunt hissed. Tie clambered to his feet. “Meryn! Bragg! Guard the wounded! You, Navy boy! Stay with
them! The rest with me, fire-team spread!”
The Ghosts moved forward and Milo moved with them, checking his pistol was cleared to fire. Despite the fear,
he felt pride. The commissar had needed all the men he could muster. He had not thought twice about including Milo.
Corbec was sure: his life was over when Larkin started shooting. Driven over the edge by what he had seen nailed
along the wall, Larkin just went crazy; mindless, oblivious to the otherwise transfixing image of Chaos in that old
tenement. Larkin simply opened fire and kept firing. “Larkin! Larkin!” Corbec hissed.
The little man’s howl was drying away into a hoarse whisper. A repetitive clicking came from the lasgun in his
hands, the power cell exhausted.
The lashing tentacles of the vast thing in the hallway had been driven back by the hammerblow of relentless laser
fire.
They had a moment of grace, time to retreat.
Corbec led his scrambling fire-team back down the tenement hall, half-carrying Larkin.
“Oh feth! Oh feth! Oh feth!” Larkin repeated, over and over.
“Shut up, Larks!” warned Corbec. “Contact Fleet Command!” he yelled to Raglon over his bead. “Tell them what
we’ve found!”
In the cover of a slumped tree-stump, Trooper Caffran sighted his lasgun to his shoulder and loosed a burst of laser
shot that sliced explosively through the foliage ahead. Bolter fire returned, smacking into the wood around him,
blasting sprays of splinters and gouts of sap.
“Major Rawne?” Caffran yelled. “Comm link’s dead!”
“I know!” spat Rawne, dropped down against a tree nearby as metal shot exploded the bark behind him. He threw
down Gaunt’s chainsword and swung his own lasgun up to fire.
Feygor took up a prone position, blasting with his own weapon, Kalen to his side. The four Ghost lasguns blasted
an arc of fire into the dense trees, the dim grove flickering with the muzzle flashes.
Rawne span, his gun lowered, but dropped his aim with a curse as he saw Gaunt moving in behind them, the men
in fire-team line.
“Report!” hissed Gaunt.
“We just walked into heavy bolter fire. Enemy positions ahead, unseen. Feels like an ambush, but who knew we
were coming?”
“Comm link?”
“Dead… jammed.”
“Would help if we could see what we were shooting at,” Gaunt remarked. He waved a “come here” to Trooper
Brostin, who hurried over, cradling the single flamer they’d pulled intact from the troop-ship.
“Positions!” Gaunt yelled, and fanned his men out so that all could take a clear shot once the target was revealed.
“Brostin?”
The trooper triggered the flame cannon and a volcanic spear of liquid fire spat into the dense undergrowth.
Maintaining the spurt, like a horizontal fountain of fire, Brostin swept it left and right.
The trees, horsetails and giant ferns ahead flared and blazed, some of them igniting as if their sap was petrol,
some wilting and withering like dust. In twenty seconds, a wall of jungle had been scorched aside and they had a
clear view sixty metres into an artificially cleared area.
Silence. Not even the bolter fire which had got them ducking.
“Scope!” called Gaunt, and took the instrument as Milo offered it up.
“Looks like we have…” Gaunt paused as the self-focus dials on his scope whirred and spun. “An Imperial
installation. Three armoured, modular cabins, two larger hardened shelters… they’ve all had the insignia spraypainted
out. Communicator-array and up-link mast for a voxcaster, that’s probably what’s jamming us… perimeter
defence net… slaved servitors mounted into autoloader bolt cannons. You must have tripped a sensor as you came in,
major. Triggered them off. I think we’ve fried a couple of them.”
“What is this place?” Caffran murmured.
“A way out… a chance we never thought we had. If we can get in there alive, that is.” Gaunt fell silent.
“But what’s it doing out here in the middle of this jungle?” Milo found himself asking. Gaunt looked round at him.
“Good question.”
The word wasn’t good. All ground forces were stretched to breaking point maintaining the gains they had made.
There was no one to move in to support the Ghosts.
“How can we fight that kind of stuff?” stammered Suth.
Corbec shook his head. He’d pulled the entire battle group back to the embankment overlooking the highway and
the tenements beyond. Tenements that held the most abominable thing he’d ever seen.
“But it has to die!” Larkin whispered. “Don’t you see? It’s causing the storm. Unless it dies, we’re all stuck here!”
“You can’t know that, larks!” Varl sneered.
Corbec wasn’t so sure. Larkin’s gut instincts had always been good bets. “Emperor save us all!” Corbec said,
exasperated. He thought hard. There had to be something… something… what would Gaunt have done? Something
arrogant, no doubt. Pulled rank, broken the rules, thrown the strategy books out of the window and used the resources
he knew he could count on…
“Hey, Raglon! Over here, lad!” he yelled to his comm-officer. “Patch me a link to the Navarre!”
Executive Officer Kreff cleared his throat, took a deep breath and stepped into the Strategium, the captain’s
armoured inner sanctum at the centre of the Navarre’s bridge. Captain Wysmark sat in dark, contemplative silence on
a reclined throne, quietly assessing the flickering overlays of runic and schematic data that flowed across the
smoothly curved walls and roof of the room.
He turned in his chair slightly. “Kreff?”
“I have, um, this is unorthodox, sir, but—”
“Out with it, man.”
“I’ve just spoken with Colonel Corbec, the acting chief of the Tanith First. His battle group is assaulting the
western edge of the Nero Hive. He requests we… activate the main batteries and present on a target he has
acquired.”
Wysmark sneered, the glow of the readouts flickering across his face in the gloom.
“Doesn’t this idiot know anything about Naval tactics?” he chuckled. “Fleet weapons will only engage a surface
target from orbit before troop deployment. Once the ground forces are in, air-strikes are the responsibility of the
attack squadrons.”
Kreff nodded. “Which are grounded due to the psychic storm, sir. The colonel is aware it is counter to usual
tactics, as orbital bombardment is not known for its… um… finesse. However, he claims this is a critical situation…
and he can supply us with pinpoint co-ordinates.”
Wysmark frowned, thoughtful. “Your assessment, Kreff? You’ve spent more time with these footsloggers since
they’ve been aboard than anyone. Is this man mad, or should I grant his request?”
Kreff dared a little smile. “Yes… and yes, sir.”
Wysmark grinned back, very slightly. He rotated his chair to face Kreff. “Let’s see those co-ordinates.”
Kreff jumped forward and handed him the data-slate.
Wysmark keyed his micro-bead intercom. “Communications: patch me to Fleet Command. I wish to advise them of
our next action. Fire control, energise the main batteries… I have a firing solution here. All stations, this is the
captain… rig for main weapon firing.”
All so very neat and civil, Kreff smiled. This really was the only way to fight a war.
There was a blink of light, an astonishing shockwave that knocked them all down, and then a deafening roar that
hammered across them.
Corbec rose, coughing dust and picked Raglon up.
“Right on the button,” he remarked jovially to his astonished men.
They scrambled up to the top of the slope and looked over the balustrade. Below them, the ruinous expanse of a
ten-lane highway stretched into the dark industrial high rises of the hive. Across the highway, a vast blazing crater
stood where the tenements had been.
“Holy Throne of Earth!” Varl stammered.
“Friends in high places,” sniggered Corbec. He glanced down the slope at the hundreds of waiting troops below,
troops who could already sense the change in the air. There was smoke, and fumes and cordite — but the stink of
Chaos was retreating. The storm was blowing itself out. “Let’s go!” he yelled into his bead.
The comms officer saluted Kreff as he crossed the polished deck of the serene bridge.
“Signal from the surface, sir.”
Kreff nodded.
“Standard Guard voxcaster encryption, data and time as now, orbit lag adjusted. Message reads: ‘Ghostly
gratitude to the Navarre. Kreff, you bastard, we knew you had it in you.’ Message ends. Sorry about the vulgarity,
sir.”
The comms officer looked up from the slate.
“I’ll take that,” Kreff said, trying to hide his grin as he sauntered away.
Gaunt moved in close to the cabins, bolt pistol in hand. Behind him came Feygor and Caffran, edging slowly.
There was a low whirr and one of the servitors nearby detected the movement and swung around, bringing its
automated weapon to bear.
Gaunt blasted it apart with three quick shots. Diving forward, he slammed in through the doorway, rolling up in the
blue, cold, artificial light of the interior, hunting for a target.
There was nothing but darkness. And dead stillness. Gaunt moved into the low habitat, mindful of the gloom.
Ahead, a dull phosphorescence shone. There was a dark bunkroom full of over-thrown furniture and scattered
papers. Gaunt took a look at one leaf and knew he would have to have them all burnt.
Rawne and Feygor slid in behind him.
“What is this?” Rawne asked.
“We’ll see…” murmured Gaunt.
They moved through the habitat into a greenhouse where the air was humid. There were things growing in the
hydroponics vats that Gaunt didn’t want to look at. Fibrous, swollen, bulging things, pulsing with hideous life.
“What is this place?” asked Feygor, horrified.
“The start of it… the beginning of Caligula’s fall,” Gaunt said. “One of the industrialists of this world, hot-housing
something he could not understand. The competition for better crops is fierce here. This poor fool didn’t realise what
he was growing.”
Or at least, Gaunt thought, I hope he didn’t. If this had been done with foreknowledge, deliberately… He shook the
idea away.
“Burn it. Burn it all,” he told his men.
“Not all,” Kalen said, entering behind them. “I scouted around the perimeter. Whoever owned this place has a
shuttle bedded in a silo out back.”
Gaunt smiled. The Emperor will always provide.
“So he didn’t die?” mused Corbec, sat on his bunk in the troop bay. Bragg shook his head and swigged from the
bottle of sacra. “Don’t think nothing’s gonna kill old Gaunt. He said he was gonna get us all out, and he did. Even
Obel and Brennan.”
Corbec thought about this. “Actually,” he said finally, “I meant Rawne.”
They both looked across the quiet bay to where Rawne and Feygor sat in quiet conversation.
“Oh, him. No, worse luck.” Bragg passed the bottle back to Corbec. “So, I hear you had some fun of your own?”
A forward post, looking out into the water-choked thickness of the Monthax jungles. The flies were thick out here,
like sparkling dust in the air. Amphibians gurgled and chugged in the mudbanks.
The sappers had raised the spit-post out beyond the broad levees of the main embankment, one of six that allowed
the Tanith snipers greater reach into the front line. They were long, zagged and lined with frag-sacking and a double
layer of overlapped flak-boards.
Gaunt edged along the spit, keeping low, passing the sentries at the heavy-bolter post at the halfway point. The
mud, unmoving and stagnant in the dug-away bed, stank like liquescent death. The sagging cable of a land-line
voxcaster ran down the length of the sacking, held above the water by iron loop-pins. Gaunt knew it ended at a voxset
at the sniper post. In the event of attack, he would want the earliest warning from his keen-eyed forwards, and
one that could be conveyed by good old, reliable, un-scrambleable cable.
Larkin was his usual edgy self. At the loop hole at the end of the spit-post, he was sat on a nest of sacking,
meticulously polishing his weapon.
A compulsive, Gaunt thought. The commissar stepped up to him. Larkin looked around, tense. “You always look
like you’re afraid of me,” Gaunt said. “Oh no, sir. Not you, sir.”
“I’d hate to think so. I count on men like you, Larkin. Men with particular skills.”
“I’m gratified, commissar.”
Larkin’s weapon was sparkling, yet still the man worked the cloth to it. “Carry on,” said Gaunt. But for how much
longer, he wondered?
FIVE
THE ANGEL OF BUCEPHALON
Larkin thought about death. He thought he might well have begged for it long ago, had he not been so scared of it. He
had never figured out, though he had spent whole nights wondering it, whether he was more afraid of death itself or
the fear of death. Worse, there had been so many times when he had expected to find out. So many moments caught in
Death’s frosty gaze, snapped at by Death’s steel incisors. The question had been nearly answered so many times.
Now perhaps, he would find out. Here. Death, or the fear of death.
If the Angel knew, she was saying nothing. Her stern face was turned down, demure, eyes closed as if sleeping,
praying hands clasped at her breast.
Outside, below them, the war to take Bucephalon raged. The stained glass in the huge lancet window, what
remained of it, shook and twinkled with reflections of tracer sprays, salvos of blazing rockets, bright air-bursts.
Larkin sat back against the cold stone pillar and rubbed a dirty hand around his lean jaw. His breathing was
slowing now at last, his pulse dropping, the anxiety attack that had seen him wailing and gasping five minutes ago
was passing like a cyclone. Or maybe he was just in the eye of that storm.
The ground shook. He felt it through the pillar. His pulse leapt for a moment. He forced himself to breathe deeply
through his mouth, slow, deep inhalations of the sort he used to steady himself before taking a shot.
“You were telling me how you came to be here.”
Larkin looked round at the Angel. Though her head was still angled down, now she was gazing at him, smiling
grimly. Larkin licked his lips and gestured idly around with one dirt-caked hand.
“War. Fighting. Fate.”
“I meant specifically,” said the Angel.
“Orders. The will of the Emperor.”
The Angel seemed to shrug her robed shoulders slightly. “You are very defensive. You hide yourself and the truth
behind words.”
Larkin blinked. For a moment, sickle-shaped moons of bright white light and fuzzy oblongs of red blackness
lurched across his vision. A tiny moment of nausea. He knew the signs. He’d known them since childhood. The
visual disturbances, the nausea, the taste of tin in his mouth. Then, the anxiety, the tunnel vision. After that, if he was
lucky, a white hot migraine pain that would burst inside his skull and leave him dazed and helpless for hours. If he
was unlucky: fits, spasms, blackouts and an awakening hours later, bruised and bloodied from the thrashing seizures;
empty, miserable, destroyed inside.
“What’s the matter?” asked the Angel.
Larkin tapped his forehead gently with his index finger. “I’m… not right. Never have been, not in all my life. The
fits used to scare my mother, but not half as much as they did me. They come on me from time to time.”
“Times like now? Under pressure? In the presence of danger?”
“That doesn’t help. But it’s just another trigger. You know what a ploin is?”
“No.”
“Round fruit. Soft, green-skinned, juicy. Lots of black pips in pink flesh. They used to grow in my uncle’s orchard
on Tanith. Divine things, but even the smell of them would trigger an attack.”
“Is there no medicine you can take?”
“I had tablets. But I forget to take them.” He took a little wooden pill-box from his jacket, opened the lid and
showed her it was empty. “Or I forget when I run out.”
“What do they call you?” asked the Angel.
“They call me Mad Larkin.”
“That is cruel.”
“But true. I’m not right in my mind. Mad.”
“Why do you think you are mad?”
“I’m talking to a statue of the Imperium, aren’t I?”
She laughed and smoothed the folds of the white robes over her kneeling legs. There was a low and perfect
radiance to her. Larkin blinked and saw glowing moons and oblongs in afterimage again.
Outside, a hail of gunfire lit the evening and a ripple of explosions crackled the air. Larkin got to his feet and
crossed to the nearest window. He looked out through interlocking pieces of coloured glass at the city below.
Steepled, tall, rising within a curtain of walls eighty metres high, the capital city-state of Bucephalon clung to the
ridge of the mountains. Smoke obscured the sky, las-fire filled the air like bright sleet. Two or more kilometres away,
he saw the pair of enormous storming ramps that the sappers of the Imperial Guard had raised against the walls.
Huge embankments of piled earth and concrete rubble almost a kilometre long, rising high and broad enough to
deliver armoured vehicles to the top of the wall. Heavy fighting within blooms of flame lit the ramps.
Below, nearer, the men on the ground looked like insect dots. Thousands, churning in trenches, spilling out across
the chewed and cratered mess of the battlefront to assault the forbidding walls.
Larkin’s vantage point was high and good. This shelled, ruined fortress was part of a stone complex which
straddled and guarded the main aqueduct into the city, a huge structure that had defied the most earnest attempts of the
enemy to fell with mines. Though heavily defended, it had seemed to Commissar Gaunt a good way in for a stealth
team. Not the first time the commissar had been wrong.
Gaunt had told them that, before the clutch of Chaos fell upon it, the city-state had been ruled by thirty-two noble
families, the descendants of merchant dynasties that had established the settlement. Their brilliant banners, the
heraldic displays of thirty-two royal houses, were displayed on the walls, tatters of rich cloth draped from massive
timber awnings. Those mighty awnings were now additionally decorated with the crucified bodies of the leaders of
those noble families.
It had been Nokad’s first act. Nokad the Blighted, Nokad the Smiling, the charismatic cult leader whose malign
forces had risen to conquer Bucephalon from within, and win one of the most honourable of the Sabbat Worlds. In his
great liberation address at the start of the crusade, Warmaster Slaydo himself had listed proud Bucephalon as one of
the worlds he was most eager to save.
Shells burst outside the windows and Larkin ducked back into cover. Glass pattered and tinkled onto the stone
floor. The flashes behind his eyes were getting worse and he could taste the tang of metal in his saliva. There was a
moaning, too, a dull aching groan in his inner ear. That was a particularly bad sign. He had only got that a time or
two before, just prior to the very worst madnesses. His vision was not entirely stable. Everything in the chapel
around him seemed elongated and stretched, like in the mirror tent at the Attica carnival. In places his vision belled
and warped, objects shimmering in and out of focus, drifting near and then away again.
He shuddered, deep in his bones.
The Angel was lighting tapers at the wrought iron offertory. Her movements were slow and lovely, pure grace.
She asked, “Why don’t you believe in angels?”
“Oh, I do.” Larkin sighed. “Not just now, before. A friend of mine, Cluggan, a sergeant, he was a bit of a military
historian. He said that at the Battle of Sarolo, angels appeared over the lines just before dawn and inspired the
Imperial forces to victory.”
“Were they visions, do you think? Mass hallucinations brought on by fatigue and fear?”
“Who am I to say?” Larkin replied, as the Angel finished her taper-lighting and blew the long flame-reed out. “I’m
mad. Visions and phantoms appear to me on a daily basis, most of them conjured by the malfunctions of my mind. I’m
not in a position to say what is real and what is not.”
“Your opinion is no less valid than any other. Did they see angels at Sarolo?”
“I…”
“Say what you think.”
“I think so.”
“And what were those angels?”
“Manifestations of the Emperor’s will, come to vitalise his loyal forces.”
“Is that what you think?”
“It’s what I’d like to think.”
“And the alternative?”
“Hnh! Group madness! The meddling of psykers! Lies constructed by relieved men after the fact! What you said…
mass hallucinations.”
“And if it was any or all of those things, does that make it any less important? Whatever they saw or thought they
saw, it inspired them to victory at Sarolo. If an angel isn’t really an angel but has the inspirational effect of one, does
that make it worthless?”
Larkin shook his head and smiled.
“Why should I even listen to you? A hallucination asking me about hallucinations!”
She took his hands in hers. The feeling shocked him and he started, but there was something infinitely calm and
soothing in her touch. Warmth wriggled into his fingers, palms, forearms, heart. He sighed again, more deeply and
looked up into her shadowy face.
“Am I real, Hlaine Larkin?”
“I’d say so. But then… I’m mad.”
They laughed together, hands clasped, his dirty, ragged fingers wrapped in her smooth white palms. Face to face
they laughed, his wheezing rattle tying itself into her soft, musical humours.
“Why did you abandon your men?” she asked. He shivered and pulled his hands out of her grip, struggling away
from her. “Don’t say that!”
“Larkin… why did you do it?”
“Don’t ask me! Don’t!”
“Do you deny it?”
He bumped against a pillar across the debris-littered aisle and turned back to her with ferocious eyes. His vision
was pulsing now, lights and alterations dancing and flexing across his line of sight. She seemed far away, then huge
and upon him. His guts churned biliously.
“Deny? I… I never left them… I…”
The Angel stood and turned away from him. He could see the way her silver-gold tresses fell to waist length
between the powerful furled wings which emerged from slits in her samite gown. Her head was bowed. She spoke
again after a long pause.
“Commissar Gaunt sent his fire-team into the aqueduct, on an insurgency mission to enter Bucephalon. The
primary target was Nokad himself. Why was that?”
“K-kill the head and the body dies! Gaunt said we’d never take this place in a year unless Nokad’s charismatic
leadership was broken! The whole city-state has become his Doctrinopolis, the wellspring of his cult, to seed and
spread the deceitful charm of his sensibilities to the other city-states on this world and beyond!”
“And what did you do?”
“W-we entered the aqueduct channels. Rawne’s company led the way to draw fire and break the defence.
Corbec’s slid in behind to leapfrog the fighting as Rawne met it and enter the city through the canal trenches.”
“Wouldn’t you drown?”
“The canals have been dry for six months. They were mined and wired but we had sweepers.”
“You were with Corbec’s company?”
“Yes. I didn’t want to go… Feth! I hated the idea of taking a suicide run like that, but I’m Corbec’s sniper… and
his friend. He insisted.”
“Why?”
“Because I’m Corbec’s sniper and his friend!”
“Why?”
“I don’t know!”
“Might it have been because you are the best shot in the entire regiment? That if anyone could get a shot at Nokad,
it was you? Might Corbec, your friend, have been reluctant to take you? Might he have been afraid you could snap if
the going got too hard?”
“I don’t know!”
“Think about it! Might he have decided to take you in the end because, no matter what the risk and no matter how
fragile your mind, you are still the best shot in the regiment? Might he have valued that in you? Might he have needed
that asset despite the risk?”
“Shut up!”
“Might you have let him down?”
Larkin screamed and pressed his face into the stone floor. His wiry body began to twitch as the storm of madness,
the tidal wave of anxiety, rose and crested in his thundering mind. He saw nothing but colours now: his vision was a
neon kaleidoscope blur.
“And what did you do? That firefight in the canal. Close quarters. Lopra dead, head blown off; Castin
disembowelled; Hech, Grosd, the others, the screaming, the misty smoke of burning blood. Corbec bellowing for
reinforcements, daggers of light cutting the air. And what did you do?”
“Nothing!”
“Not nothing. You ran. You ran away. You scrambled and ran and ran and ran and ended up here. Sobbing,
vomiting, soiling yourself.”
“No…” Larkin breathed, spread face down on the cold floor. He felt he was in a vacuum now. There was no
sound, no vision, no pain. Just her voice.
“You deserted them. That makes you a deserter.”
Larkin looked up sharply. The Angel stood by the reliquary, lifting the studded wooden lid. She took something out
and placed it upon her head, smoothing her silver-gold hair under the brim. It was a cap. A commissar’s regimental
cap. Gaunt’s cap.
She reached into the holy box and lifted out something else, wrapped in dusty, mouldering cloth.
Her perfect hands unwound it. A bolt pistol. With incongruous sureness, her slender hands slammed a sicklepattern
magazine into the slot, racked the slide and thumbed off the safety. She turned.
Her face, below the commissar’s cap, was lean and angular. Larkin hadn’t realised how chiselled and thin her
cheeks and chin were before. Cut out of stone, firm and fierce, like Ibram Gaunt. She raised the bolt pistol in her
right hand and pointed it at Larkin. Her wings opened and spread, twenty metres wide, a vast arch of perfect white
eagle feathers.
“Do you know what we do to deserters, Larkin?” she said grimly.
“Yes.”
“We are created to inspire and uplift, to carry the spirit of battle forward, to maintain the sense of glory in the
hearts of the Imperial warrior. But if that spirit falters, we are also here to punish.”
“Y-you sound like Gaunt…”
“Ibram Gaunt and I have much in common. A common purpose, a common function. Inspiration and punishment.”
It seemed as if the world outside the chapel had fallen silent. As if the war had stopped.
“Did you desert, Larkin?”
He stared at her, at the gun, at the terrible wingspan. Slowly, he got to his knees and then his feet. “No.”
“Prove it.”
Every joint in his body ached, every nerve sang. His head was clear and yet racing and strange. He walked with
measured care over to his fallen pack.
“Prove it, Larkin! The Emperor needs you with him at this hour! Muster your strength!”
He looked back at her. The gun and the gaze had not faltered.
“How did you know my name?”
“You told me.”
“My forename. Hlaine. I don’t use that anymore. How did you know?”
“I know everything.”
He laughed. Loud and hard, his thin chest shaking as he stripped open his pack. “Feth take you! I’m no deserter!”
“Tell me why.”
“See this?” Larkin slid his sniper rifle from the sling across the back of his pack. He held it up and freed the firing
mechanism with a deft twist of his hand.
“A gun.”
“A lasgun. Workhorse of the Guard. Solid, dependable, tough. You can knock it, drop it, club with it, submerge it
and it just keeps on going.”
The Angel took a step forward, looking at the gun he held out to her. “It’s not standard. Not a standard M-G
pattern. Where’s the integral optics, the charge-setting slide? That barrel: it’s too long, too thin. And that flash
suppressed.”
Larkin grinned and reached into his pack. “It’s the sniper variant. Same body, but stripped down. I did some of the
work myself. I took out the integral optics because I use this.” He held up a bulky tube to show her for a moment,
then slotted it into a bracket on the side of the gun case. He flipped covers off both ends of the tube and the device
spread a faint red glow ahead of the gun.
“Night spotter. My own. I tooled the bracket to fit. I used to use it to spot for larisel in the woods back home.”
“Larisel?”
“Small rodents with a fine pelt. Made a good income hunting them before the founding.”
He slid his hands down the gun and tapped the barrel. “XC 52/3 strengthened barrel. Longer, and thinner than the
standard. Good for about twenty shots.” He kicked the pack at his feet, which clinked. “I always carry two or three
spares. They twist and pull out. You can switch them in about a minute if you know what you’re doing.”
“Why the strengthened barrel?”
“Increased range for a start, tighter accuracy, and because I use these…” Larkin pulled a powerpack from his kit
and slammed it into place. “We call them ‘hotshots’. Overpowered energy clips, liquid metal batteries juiced to the
limit. Bigger hits but fewer. Perfect for marksman work. And that’s why there’s no charge setting slider on my piece.
One size fits all.”
“The stock is made of wood.”
“Nalwood, Tanith grown. Hike what I know.”
“And that long flash suppressed.”
“I’m a sniper, Angel. I don’t want to be seen.”
“Are you a sniper, Hlaine Larkin? I was sure you were a deserter.” The gloomy voice echoed around the chapel.
Larkin turned away from her, expecting a bolt round in the back of the head. His own head was clear, clearer than
it had been in months.
“Think what you like. I’ll tell you what I know.”
He crossed to the arched doorway of the chapel and settled down in a crouch, the lasgun resting on a finial of
stonework. It afforded him a wide view down onto the half-ruined canal on the upper level of the great aqueduct.
Larkin settled himself, shook out his neck, flexed his arms. He took a sight through the eyepiece of his scope.
“My company’s primary mission was to take Nokad. He’s a charismatic. He leads by personality and that means
he stays at the fore. This aqueduct has been recognised by both sides as the primary weakness of Bucephalon. We’ve
attacked it. Hard.
“Nokad will want to defend it just as hard. And that means inspiring his troops along the length of it. And that, in
turn, means he’ll be here in person.”
“And if he’s not?” asked the Angel.
“Then I’m just another nameless wooden marker in the cemetery.” He was no longer looking at her, no longer
caring about her terrible presence. She could be holding that boltgun to his temple for all he cared.
“You trust that scope to make the shot?” she whispered.
“I calibrated it myself. And yes, I trust the scope. Funny thing, but whatever goes on around me, whatever
madness…”—and at that Larkin dared a glance round at the hovering presence at his shoulder—“I always see the
truth through my scope. It shows me the world as it really is. Truth, not what my fethed up mind tells me is there.”
A long pause.
“Maybe I should look through the scope at you some time?” he ventured.
“Haven’t you got a job to do, Hlaine?”
“Yes. My job.” He turned back to the scope and shut his eyes.
“Your eyes are closed. What are you doing?”
“Shhh! To take a shot, your breathing must be controlled. More than that, your weapon must be pointing naturally at
the target.” He opened his eyes again and fiddled with the lasgun as it lay in the lip of stone.
“What’s the matter?”
“I need to baffle the barrel against the stone. I need cloth to wrap around it.” He began to pull at his cloak, trying
to tear a strip off it. There was a shredding noise behind him. A perfect hand passed him a long strip of glowing
white cloth, light and warm to the touch.
“Use this, Hlaine.”
Larkin smiled. He wrapped the silky material around the muzzle of his rifle and then nested it back into the stony
over hang. It rested better now, bandaged with angelic satin, neatly snuggled into the turn of the hard buttress.
“Thanks,” he said, resuming his position.
“What are you doing now?”
Larkin flexed, as if fidgeting. “I must have a stable firing position. If the gun wobbles even slightly, the shots can
go wild. I need a firm grip, but not too tight. I want it to point naturally at the target. If I have to apply pressure to
keep it aimed, then it’s going to miss. See, here’s the trick…” He closed his eyes.
“Take aim and then close your eyes. Open them again. Chances are your aim will have wandered. Realign your
body and repeat.”
“How many times?”
“As many as is necessary.” Larkin closed his eyes again, opened them, shuffled, closed his eyes.
“Eventually, when you open your eyes, the gun will be pointing precisely, naturally, exactly where your body falls
and directs it.”
“You’re breathing slowly,” said the Angel, a whisper in his ear. “Why?”
Larkin smiled, but ever so slightly as to not disrupt the perfect pattern of his firing position. “Once you’re in
position, breathe slow, a regular rhythm. Keep it going, nice and relaxed. When you get the shot, take a couple of
deep breaths, pause, breathe out just a tad, and then hold. Then fire. Then breathe out fully.”
“How long will this take?” the Angel asked behind him. “As long as it takes to get a target.”
Nokad the Smiling sang to his brethren as they advanced down the upper canal of the aqueduct. An echelon of things
that had been men, now trailing long tattered robes sewn from the hides of those they had defeated. They brandished
weapons, slapping them in dull time to the chant. They passed over the butchered and exploded remains of the foe
who had assaulted their one weak link that afternoon.
Nokad the Smiling was well over two metres tall, his frame heavy set and powerful. Piercings studded his naked
torso and arms: loops, rings, chains and spikes armouring his sheened skin and glittering as brightly as his perfect
teeth.
“Make trophies of them!” Nokad grinned as he passed the corpses. Imperial Guard, weak, puny things, draped in
dull fatigues and anonymous cloaks. There was fighting ahead, the barking returns of lasguns at close range.
Corbec was in the canal gully with three remaining men and Rawne yelling through the intercom.
“It’s no good! They’ve got it sealed tight! We have to withdraw!”
“Feth you, Rawne! This is the only way! We move in! Bring your men forward!”
“It’s suicide, Corbec, you fool! We’ll all be dead in a moment!”
“Are you deserting me, major? Is that what you’re doing? There’s a price for that!”
“Feth you, you insane moron! You’d have to be utterly mad to go in there!”
Nokad advanced. His men loved him. They sang together, jubilant as they forced the invaders back.
On the canal lip, Nokad howled his inspirational verses to his men, arms uplifted, chainsword whirring.
There was a crack, a stab of light — and Nokad’s head vanished in a film of blood.
Larkin fell back in the doorway, frothing and convulsing, spasms snapping his body as the brain fever took hold once
more.
“Larks? Larks?” Corbec’s voice was soft.
Larkin lay in a foetal ball, messed by his own fluids, in the doorway of the shattered chapel. As he came around he
felt his mind was clear, violently clear, like it had been purged with light.
“Colm…”
“You son of a bitch, Larks!” Corbec pulled him upright, unsteady on his legs. Larkin’s lasgun lay on the floor, its
barrel broken, burnt and spent.
“You got him! You got him, you old bastard! You smoked him good!”
“I did?”
“Listen to that!” Corbec crowed, pulling Larkin around towards the doorway. There was a cheering and chanting
noise rising from below the aqueduct. “They’ve surrendered! We’ve taken Bucephalon! Nokad is fried!”
“Shit…” Larkin sank to his knees.
“And I thought you’d run on us! Honestly! I thought you’d fething deserted!”
“Me?” Larkin said, looking up.
“I shouldn’t have doubted you, should I?” Corbec asked, bear-hugging the wiry little sniper.
“Where’s the angel gone?” Larkin said quietly.
“Angel? There’s no angel here except her!” Corbec pointed to the damaged statue of the angel above the chapel
font, a beautiful winged woman knelt in the attitude of prayer. Her perfect hands were clasped. Her head was bowed
demurely. The inscription on the plinth rejoiced that she was a symbol of the God-Emperor, a personification of the
Golden Throne who had come to the elders of Bucephalon in the first days of the colony and watched over them as
they conquered the land.
An old myth. A hunk of stone.
“But—” Larkin started as Corbec dragged him to his feet. “But nothing!” Corbec laughed.
Larkin began to laugh too. He convulsed and gagged with the force of laughter inside him.
Corbec dragged him from the chapel, both laughing still.
The very last thing Larkin saw before Corbec wrenched him away was his fallen lasgun, with the peerless,
scorched white cloth still wrapped around the barrel.
A sudden barrage of enemy guns, distant, impatient, came on just before the middle of the night over Monthax, and
stippled the belly of the low brown sky with reflected flashes of fire and light. Wet, hollow rumbles barked and
growled through the swamps and ground mist like starving hounds. Leagues away, some brutal night-combat was
underway.
Gaunt woke instinctively at the sound of the guns and took a walk out of the command shed. The sound was coming
from the east and he had a sergeant circle around to check on the sentry lines. The artillery sounded like someone
flapping and cracking a large, sweat-damp sheet in the hot, heavy air.
He crossed a gurgling creek via a duck-board bridge and made it into the tree line just as the humidity broke and
cold drooling rain began to fall through air suddenly stirred by chill breezes. It was almost a relief, but the rain was
sticky and sappy and stung his eyes.
Gaunt found himself on the embanked approach to one of the main sentry towers and pulled himself up the ladder.
The towers, set at hundred metre intervals along the main defile, rose some ten metres out of the surface filth. They
were fashioned from groups of tree-trunks, shored together and stout buttressed with riveted beams, and supported
large flak-board gun-nests mounted on the top.
Up in the dark nest, Trooper Bragg tended a cradle-mounted pair of twinned heavy bolters, drums of shells piled
around his huge feet. A flak-board cover kept the rain off and the nest was shrouded by netting.
“Sir!” Bragg saluted, his big face cracking into a broad, embarrassed grin. He was making fortified caffeine over
a little burner, his huge paws dwarfing the pot and cup. He tried to hide the flask of sacra behind the stove, but the
scent of the liquor was pungent in the close air of the nest.
Gaunt nodded the salute. “I’ll have one myself,” he said. “A stiff one.”
Bragg seemed to relax. He sloshed a generous measure of sacra into a second battered cup and fussed over the
boiling pot. Gaunt was amused, as always, by the combination of brutal strength and timidity in this giant of a man.
Bragg’s hands were big and strong enough to crush skulls, but he moved almost meekly, as if afraid of his own
strength — or afraid of what others might think him capable of.
He handed the commissar a hot cup and Gaunt sat on a pile of shell-drums, gesturing out across the jungle to the
east. The nest’s raised vantage point afforded a better view of the distant fighting.
Flares and tracers showed above the trees, and as the rain dissipated the mist, there were ruddy ground fires to be
seen amid the trunks.
“Someone’s having fun,” he remarked.
Bragg nodded, sipping his own cup. “I make four or maybe five enemy positions, infantry support teams. They’ve
advanced and dug in, because the fire-patterns are static, but they’ve found something to shoot at.”
“If they move this way, we’ll need to take action.”
Bragg patted his heavy weapons. “Let ’em come.”
Gaunt grinned. Bragg was a good heavy weapons technician, but his aim had scarcely improved since the
Founding. Still, with guns with that sort of cycle rate and that much ammo, he should hit something.
“Oh, while I remember,” Gaunt said, “the western embankments are collapsing again. I told Major Rawne that
you’d help the detail re-dig tomorrow. They need some heavy lifting.”
Bragg nodded without question. His great physical strength was an asset to the Ghosts, and was matched by his
geniality and willingness to help. He reminded Gaunt of some great blunt weapon, like a club: deadly when
delivered properly, but difficult to wield or aim.
Bragg batted a moth away from his face. “Precious little place we’ve found here,” he remarked.
“Monthax is… short on charm,” Gaunt admitted, studying the hulking trooper quizzically. Bragg was a strange
man. Gaunt had decided that long ago. He’d never met a human so physically powerful, yet mentally restrained, as if
he was somehow afraid of the terrible power he could unleash. Others took it for stupidity and regarded big old
Bragg as dumb. But the man patently wasn’t stupid. In his own, quiet, mountainous way, he was the most formidable
and dangerous Ghost of all. So preoccupied by his physical power, others always underestimated the mind behind it.
And the mind, Gaunt knew, was the strongest thing of all.
SIX
THAT HIDEOUS STRENGTH
Caligula, after the Imperial liberation. Nights as bright as day, lit by the burning hive cities; days as dark as night,
choked by the petrochemical smoke. Soot, like fat, black snowflakes, fluttered down everywhere. Even out here, in
the deadlands.
Steepled canyons of coral-bright rock. Wisps of fluorescent dust licking the high places and the rims of the
calderas. Cracked, dry basins of hard, russet cake-earth. Wide, slumping ridges of glass-sand. And death, bleached
and baked white, like bones that had been out in the sun for years.
Eighteen cargo transports, thirty-wheel monsters, coughing blue exhaust from their vertical pipe-stacks, ground
down the red-rock pass in low gear. The tractor units at the front of each payload wagon were monsters, armoured
cabs of scorched metal rattling on top of a huge engine unit, glaring forward through multiple fog-lamp eyes and
grinning fly-flecked smiles of fender bars, radiator grilles and spiked running boards, flanking the massive transports
were the outriders, rushing through the dust on track-bikes and in armoured cars.
Palapr Tuvant, transport driver, Caligula born and bred, wrestled with the half-moon wheel of the convoy’s lead
freighter and glanced around at his co-driver. Hewn Milloom was looking out of the cab window, occasionally
regarding his chronometer.
They were both wringing with sweat, entombed by the heat from the roaring engine under their feet. Milloom had
dropped the window armour panels and opened the metal vents in the hope of washing them with cool breeze from
outside. But the surface temperature out in the deadlands was pushing forty degrees, and they baked. Occasionally,
sprays of hot engine oil spurted back from the leaky head gasket and spattered in at them through the forward grillescreen.
Milloom sat back in his ripped leather seat and looked up at the cab’s ceiling hatch. “He’s still up there?”
Tuvant nodded, wrenching the wheel. Both of them were all too used to the juddering, shaking motion of the
vehicle. “Probably sticking his head out of the turret like a dog, enjoying the rush of air.”
Milloom chuckled. “Kec, but he’s a dumb-ass, right? Never stood in line for brains.”
Tuvant nodded. “Typical Guard, all muscle and no head. Where the kec were they when the hives fell? Huh?
Answer me that?”
“In a troop-ship in transit,” Trooper Bragg answered plainly, his huge bulk clambering down the rungs from the
top hatch to join them. He stood at the back of the cab, holding onto a roll-bar for support as the tractor lurched over
uneven ground. “Colonel-Commissar Gaunt said we got here as fast as we could.” He smiled sheepishly at the twoman
driving team.
“I’m sure he did,” Tuvant murmured.
Bragg edged forward, using handholds to stop himself from falling. “We’re making good time, aren’t we?”
“Brilliant time,” Milloom replied, turning away from the big Ghost. “Calphernia Station will rejoice when we
arrive.”
“I’m sure it will,” Bragg smiled, sinking into the bench seat behind the driver’s position. “That’ll be good. When
the colonel-commissar ordered me to command this convoy detail, I said to him I will get it through on time, trust
me, colonel-commissar. I will. And we are, aren’t we?”
“Yes, we are. Right on time,” Tuvant said.
“Good. That’s good. The colonel-commissar will be pleased.”
Milloom muttered something unflattering about the high and mighty colonel-commissar.
“What did you say?” Bragg asked sharply.
Milloom stiffened. He looked across at Tuvant. They’d been in the company of this huge guardsman for maybe
three hours all told, and had so far reckoned him to be dim-witted and slow. Of course, his sheer bulk was
impressive, but they had felt confident about laughing at him behind his back. Now Milloom tensed, feeling perhaps
he’d gone too far, feeling the giant behind them might suddenly unleash his undoubted physical power in a mindless
tantrum.
“I… I didn’t say anything.”
“You did. You said something about my colonel-commissar. Something bad.”
Milloom turned slowly to face the huge Tanith. “I didn’t mean anything. I was just joking.”
“So it was a bad thing. An insult.”
“Yes, but just a joke.” Milloom tensed, expecting the worst, reaching his left hand down beside his seat for the
axle-bar he kept stowed there.
“That’s okay,” Bragg said lightly, turning to look out of a window. “Everyone is entitled to their opinion. The
colonel-commissar told us that.”
Milloom sat back and exchanged knowing grins with the driver. A total dummy, they agreed wordlessly.
“So,” Tuvant asked, teasing, looking at Bragg in the rear-view mirror, “you do everything this colonel-commissar
tells you?”
“Of course!” the giant replied brightly. “He’s the colonel. And the commissar. We’re his men. We’re Imperial
Guard. Tanith First-and-Only. We’re loyal to the Emperor and we do everything the colonel-commissar tells us.”
“What if he told you to jump off a cliff?” Milloom laughed, conspiratorially sharing the baiting with Tuvant.
“Then we’d jump off the cliff. Was that a trick question?”
The convoy rolled on into the deadlands. It had assembled that morning on a stained curtain road outside the halfburned
ruin of the Aurelian Hive City, where a second front of Imperial Guard had seized control after the main
assault on Nero Hive. The mammoth Imperium victory was in no doubt, but still pockets of enemy soldiers held out,
fighting a lingering war of wastage and attrition to wear out the lines of supply.
The Imperial Guard closed in en masse to root out and eradicate all remnants of resistance, and the work to
rebuild Caligula began. What resources were available — and despite everything Aurelian Hive was rich in
storehouses — had to be redistributed. The convoy marked the first attempt to convey relief supplies to the stricken
Hive Calphernia. That meant a two hundred kilometre crossing of the battlewaste recently dubbed “the deadlands”.
Six convoys had departed Aurelian Hive that dawn. Four were headed to Nero Hive, one to Tiberius and one to
Calphernia. Gaunt’s Ghosts, the Tanith First, were given the protection duty. It was agreed that the run to Calphernia
was the most dangerous, as it crossed the territories of bandits — ex-hive workers who had fled the war and set
themselves up as feudal warlords in the waste. Not a single relief vehicle had made it through in the last six weeks
and the rumours told of thousands of rebels, stockpiling weapons. Some even whispered that Chaos powers were
involved.
Everyone, including Bragg himself, was amazed when Gaunt chose Bragg to command the defence of the
Calphernia convoy. Gaunt had ignored all the protests and taken the bemused Bragg into his command bunker to brief
him.
Caober, Rawne, Larkin and the other Ghosts decided that Gaunt’s choice simply represented an acceptance that the
Calphernia convoy wouldn’t get through. It was a write-off and Gaunt wasn’t going to waste any decent commander
to such long odds.
“And so our caring commissar shows his true colours!” Rawne had hissed, playing with the hilt of his silver
Tanith dagger. Others fidgetted nervously, unhappy with what seemed to be going on but unwilling to question
Gaunt’s authority directly.
Bragg simply grinned at the honour bestowed upon him. It seemed he missed the irony. He was oblivious to the
fact that he was already given up as dead. Rawne spat in the dust.
At the behest of the men, Corbec had approached Gaunt fiercely, demanding to know why Gaunt had been so
callous as to deem Bragg expendable. “Sir, with me or Hasker or Lerod at the helm, we might get a chance to drive
that convoy through. Don’t throw it away, don’t waste Bragg—”
“I know what I’m doing,” Gaunt had replied curtly, sending the proud Bragg and seventy other Ghosts off on the
detail from which everyone was sure no one would come back.
The convoy rumbled down a wide-bottomed crevasse and began to cross a cracked, red dust-plain of baked earth.
Heat shimmered up, distorting the horizons. Outrider one roared ahead of the convoy, a track-bike driven by
Corporal Meryn with Trooper Caffran manning the pintle-mounted twin autocannons in the rear. Both had their
stealth cloaks wrapped up around their mouths against the heat and dust, and wore filmed, heat-crazed goggles.
Meryn heaved the cycle to a halt on a rise, the convoy a kilometre behind them, and pulled down his swaddling
dust-veils to spit and cough.
“You feel that?” he called back to Caffran. “Eyes watching us from all around?”
“Just your imagination,” Caffran returned, cranking the guns round all the same. Caffran felt a pulse in his temple
that wasn’t simply the heat. He’d seen the expression on Colonel Corbec’s face when Gaunt had given the convoy
command to Bragg. They were dead out here, as good as written off. The hundred burnt and crucified bodies they
had passed on the roadside an hour before had nothing to do with imagination. Caffran shuddered.
Other outriders whirred forward in hazes of dust. Trooper Kelve drove one cycle with Merrt, one of Corbec’s
favoured sharpshooters, in the rear cradle. Merrt had his sniper gun wrapped in oil-cloth in the footwell below him,
ready to switch to it when the autocannon rig ran dry. Kelve pulled them up to a revving halt on a sand-rise.
To their left, engine idling, was Ochrin and his gunner Hellat. To their right, five hundred metres distant,
Mkendrick and his gunner Beris. A signal, waved from bike to bike, then they all flew forward into the dusty basin
beyond, racing parallel to the track left by Meryn and Caffran. The huge convoy thundered in after them. Tailing it,
and flanking the rear, came three more outriders: Fulke with Logris gunning, Mktea with Laymon at the weapons, and
Tanhak with Grummed manning the cannons. Behind them, an Imperial Guard half-track driven by Wheln, with Abat
and Brostin at the weapons stations, and another with long, double-tracks driven by Mkteeg with Rahan and Nehn
crewing a missile launcher platform.
Bragg clambered up into the gun-turret over the cab of his tractor, half-hearing the whispered slanging of the
Caligulan drivers, Milloom and Tuvant. Heat and dust assaulted his big face. The sun was a torrential heat. His
nostrils immediately clogged with ash-dust and he had to hawk and spit to clear his head. As an afterthought, he
wrapped his stealth cloak around his mouth and nose, pulling out the goggles he had been issued and also
remembering to wipe zinc paste over his exposed skin. The paste, clagging and damp in a small circular tin, smelled
bad, but the colonel-commissar had told them all to use it. Bragg lifted his micro-bead comms-set and slid the plug
into his ear.
“Bragg to all Ghosts, remember to use your sun-paint. The zinc stuff. Tike the colonel-commissar told us. Over.”
Over the vox-link came a round of curses and protests.
“I mean it,” Bragg said. “Wipe it on, Tanith. There’s burning and there’s burning, the colonel-commissar said, and
our fair skins won’t last a minute out in this.”
Sliding his bike to a halt, Ochrin pulled out his tin and grudgingly applied paste to his brow and nose. He held the
tin out, straight armed, to Hellat in the back.
There was soft, distant ping, a hollow, empty sound.
Hellat took the tin from Ochrin’s outstretched hand just as he realised Ochrin no longer had a face. Ochrin’s
corpse flopped stiffly back off the saddle.
Hellat cried out in alarm, gripping the yokes of his pintle weapon and raining metal fury on the distant dunes.
“Ochrin’s down! We are attacked!” he screamed as he fired.
A second later a missile lifted his cycle into the air and blew Hellat and Ochrin’s corpses into pieces of cooked
meat each no larger than a clenched fist.
Vox-traffic suddenly tumbled in confusion over the static. Murmuring the litany of protection the Ecclesiarch had
taught him back on Tanith, at the Primer Educatory, Mkteeg drew his half-track hull-down behind a salty dune and his
weapon crew spat a rack of missiles into the cliff edges.
Meryn drove his cycle around in a wide arc, pulling to rejoin, puffing up a wide skim of dust. Caffran rattled
round the gun mount and flickered off a curving row of tracer shells into the position marked by Hellat’s last assault.
Ochrin and Hellat’s vehicle lay in a burning heap on a crisped sand-rise.
The main convoy slowed as the attack made itself known. The enemy fire whickered into them from the right hand
side like rain — a few shots at first, then faster and more furious.
Mkendrick raced his bouncing bike in, screaming a Tanith warcry, and only when his gunner didn’t begin firing did
he turn to find Beris hanging dead over the pintle mount, sunlight shining through a vast hole in his torso. Mkendrick
braked, leapt out of the driver’s position and tossed Beris’ corpse aside, maniacally training and firing the guns from
a stationary position.
As his cycle raced into the firefight, Merrt knew he had a good angle, pumping round after round from the big
calibre guns into the distant dust dunes. He screamed to his driver to go faster and to overrun the enemy. Kelve was
about to reply, or was half-way through saying something, when a salvo of stub rounds tore the vehicle to pieces and
overturned them.
Merrt pulled himself out of the dust and looked round to see Kelve trapped under the wreckage, shrieking in pain.
The control column had impaled him, ripping him open and pinning him into the sand under three tonnes of twisted,
smouldering metal.
Merrt ran to him, trying to raise the wreck, trying to tip it over. Kelve bayed at him, begging, pleading.
When Merrt realised how heavy the wreck was and how grievous Kelve’s wound, he did as his driver instructed
him. He took out his laspistol and shot Kelve through the head, point blank. Kelve’s body spasmed and died,
gratefully.
Merrt dived flat as further fire found his position. He located his swaddled sniper gun, thrown clear out from the
wreck. There was no time to check for damage. He pulled off the cloth, lay low, and sighted, snuggling a fresh power
cell into the receiver. His long sight brought the enemy into view, magnified, hazy, distant figures milling around
trying to reload a khaki-painted missile launcher.
He made his first shot. It went long. He adjusted his scope, as Larkin had taught him, breathed out, and made the
second shot a clean kill. The enemy were turning in confusion when he made the next three shots in calm, cold series.
Three clean hits. Sniper Master Larkin would be proud.
Atop the main tractor, Bragg yelled into his micro bead, ordering the convoy to form a defensive circle. Various
counter-demands whipped into his ears over the link and he shouted them down, gripping the gun-yokes with both of
his huge hands and sending tight bursts of hammer-fire into the starboard hills.
The convoy vehicles reluctantly obliged, following Bragg’s orders, circling round and forming a defensive
position that the remaining outriders circled. Vehicles two and four in the convoy took heavy hits, and vehicle six
exploded outright as a rocket torched into its tractor unit. The side-panelling of the cargo-unit rippled off as internal
explosions blistered out through the metal skin, shredding it. Scraps of metal hull span away from the boiling blacksmoked
fireball, puffing hundreds of individual ripples in the ashy sand all around.
Relieved at the turret guns by Trooper Cavo, Bragg dropped down into the cab to find Milloom and Tuvant
sheltering under window level, the grid-shields and hatches pulled up.
“This is madness, you stupid kec!” Tuvant bellowed. “They’ll pin us down and murder us all!”
“I don’t think these bandits are really so tough,” Bragg began.
Tuvant turned on him. “You kec-head! They’re all over us! God-Emperor, but there are thousands of bandits out
here, more than enough to kill us all! We should have kept moving! Stopping like this, we’ll give them all a chance to
congregate for the kill!”
Bragg shambled across to the Caligulan drivers. There was a dull look in his eye Tuvant didn’t like. With one
meaty, hairy-knuckled paw, Bragg lifted Tuvant off the cabin deck by his throat.
“I’m in charge here,” he growled, his voice as deep and solid as his build, reverberative. “The colonelcommissar
said so. If we have to fight our way through to Calphernia a micron at a time, we will. And we will all
fight. Clear?”
“C-clear!” gasped Tuvant, going blue.
“Now, can you make yourself useful?”
“How?” snarled Milloom acidly from behind. Bragg dropped Tuvant, who sprawled, retching, and turned to face
the other driver. Milloom had his greasy axle-bar in his hands. “You don’t scare me, Ghost.”
“Then you must be very stupid,” Bragg muttered, turning aside without interest. Milloom launched forward to
crush the big man’s skull with five kilos of cold-stamped metal. Bragg broke stride lightly, impossibly lightly it
seemed for such a great bulk. He caught the descending bar in one palm. There was an audible slap. Milloom gasped
as the bar was pulled out of his hands. Bragg tossed it aside.
“You can start by not attacking me. You fething non-combatants really wind me up. Where the feth would you be if
we hadn’t come to pull your arses out of the Chaos pit?”
“Safe and sound in Aurelian Hive, probably!” Milloom jeered. “Not out in the deadlands, surrounded by terrorist
infantry!”
Bragg shrugged. “Probably. With the other cowards. Are you a coward, Driver Milloom?”
“Kec you!”
“Just asking. The colonel-commissar told me to watch out for cowards. Told me to shoot them on sight, as they
were treasonous dogs who didn’t deserve the salvation of the Golden Throne. I wouldn’t shoot them, not me.”
There was a pause.
Bragg smiled. “I’d just hit them. Has a similar result. Do you want me to hit you, Milloom?”
“N… no.”
“Then don’t assault me again. You can help even if you don’t know the business end of a weapon from your own
arse. Get on the voxcaster. Recite the Ecclesiarchy’s Oath of Obedience. You know that?”
“Of course I know that! Then what?”
“Then recite it again. Make it clear and proud. Recite it again, then again and then again. If you get bored, insert
the Emperor’s Daily Prayer for variation. Maybe the Imperial Litany of Deliverance for good measure. Fill the voxchannels
with soothing, inspiring words. Can you do that?”
Milloom nodded and crossed to the vox-caster built into the tractor’s dash.
“Good man,” Bragg said. Milloom started to speak into the caster horn, remembering the verses he had learned as
a child.
Outside, laser and stub fire whined into the circled convoy. The outriders were laying in hard. Meryn drew his
bike in so that Caffran could do real damage to the slowly encircling bandits.
Fulke, Mktea and Tanhak ran the line. From the back of Fulke’s machine, Logris excelled and scored four kills.
Mktea’s gunner Laymon made one of his own before the upper part of his head was scythed off by a las shot at the
mouth. Tanhak and Grummed made six, maybe seven, good kills before a short-range missile ended their lives and
their glory. Debris and body parts flew out from a searing typhoon of ignited bike fuel.
“Bragg! Bragg! We have to retreat!” Wheln yelled from the half-track, Abat dead behind him and Brostin blazing
with his flamer.
In the cab of his freighter, Bragg was calmly unwrapping his autocannons from a felt shroud. Behind him, Milloom
was steadily reciting into the vox-horn. Bragg paused, fingering his micro-bead to open the vox-line.
“No, Wheln. No retreat. No retreat,” he said simply.
Rubbing his sore throat, Tuvant scrambled up from the floor, about to argue with the huge Ghost, but he stopped
dead as he saw the weapon that the Tanith hulk was preparing. Not one but two autocannons, the like of which were
usually fixed to tripod or pintle mounts. Bragg had them lashed together, with a makeshift trigger array made out of a
bent ration-pack fork so he could fire them as a pair. Long belt loops of ammunition played out from the gun-slots,
leading back to a parcel of round-boxes.
Bragg punched out the perspex window section from the rear of the cab and laid his twin muzzles across the sill.
He looked back at Tuvant.
“You wanted something?”
“No,” Tuvant replied, ducking suddenly as stub-fire perforated the cab and showered them with metal shards and
soot.
“I can fire this on my own if I have to, but it would be easier if I had someone to feed.”
Tuvant blinked. Then he scrambled forward and grabbed the ammo-belts, easing them around so they would pull
unobstructed from the boxes.
“Thanks,” smiled Bragg quickly, then turned to hunch and squint out of the window port. He squeezed the trigger
assembly. The twin guns barked deafeningly in the confines of the cab. Milloom paused in his recitation, and covered
his ears with a grimace. Tuvant shuddered, but kept working dutifully to play the ammo-belts out clear and clean.
Shell cases billowed through the air like chaff.
Bragg’s first devastating salvo had gone wide, passing over the top of the nearby cliffs. He grinned at himself and
adjusted his aim.
“Try again…” he murmured. “What?” asked Tuvant. “Nothing.”
Bragg opened fire again, the barking chatter of the paired guns filling the cab again. Now his shots were stitching
along the valley wall and crossing the far dunes. Something he touched exploded in a violent plume of red fire.
Bragg played his guns around that area again for a minute or so.
Out on the dunes, with the convoy circled behind him, Merrt crawled forward, re-adjusting his aim. He could hear
the anxious but determined voice reciting the Emperor’s Prayer over his ear-plug and it filled him with a sense of
right and dignity. He blinked dust out of his eyes. He’d ditched his sand-goggles the moment he’d hit the ground.
Larkin had told him that nothing should get between a sniper’s scope and his naked eye. You only saw the truth of the
world when your eye was clear and you were looking down your scope, Larkin had said in training. Merrt smiled at
the memory. He remembered how Larkin would often carry his scope around in his thigh-pouch and take it out to
look at people through it. “To tell if they’re lying,” he always said.
Merit’s scope wasn’t lying now. He could see over three dozen bandits advancing over the dunes under cover of
the foggy dust kicked up by the firefight. They were running low, heads down, hugging the contours of the ground.
Merrt took aim at the nearest one. He sighed and fired, timing his finger to the moment of respiratory emptiness so
nothing in his torso would jerk the aim. The laser burst punched through the top of the bandit’s bowl-helmet,
presented as it was by his head-down approach. The shot probably passed down through his skull, his neck and his
torso, following the line of his spinal column, Merrt thought, as the figure dropped stone dead in a crumpled pile.
He adjusted his aim and took another bandit in the face when he looked up to take a bearing. A slight swing to the
left, and another came into his sight, scurrying forward to gain new cover. A sigh. A squeeze. A slight recoil. The
figure flipped back and fell still.
Merit readjusted and was about to target a small group of infantry when their position dissolved in a haze of heat
and outflung debris. Missile hit, he thought.
Rahan and Nehn were keeping the aim of the missile turret low, sliding off single shots that hugged the ground
cover and buried themselves in the foe. Mkteeg edged the half-track along The lip of the folded dunes, skirting the
enemy as best he could. His weapon crew had almost expended their missiles, so he set the drive in idle and
clambered back into the turret bed to set up the stub-gun folded away in a deck-locker.
He had it up and lashed in to the armoured side panel of the track as Rahan volleyed off five missiles high into the
air. They looked like burning javelins as they arched over the desert and flew down onto unseen targets below the
dune.
Mktea fired the autocannon mount Laymon had been manning until the feeder belt jammed and the gun glowed red.
With a curse, he snatched up his lasrifle and dived over the side. Enemy las-fire reached his vehicle a moment later
and blew it up in a shower of metal debris that pattered around him as he crawled through the sand. Mktea felt a
sharp and painful impact in his ankle. Looking back, prone on his belly, he realised his combat trousers were
smouldering from the wash of cinders and a thick piece of metal debris had pierced his foot.
He beat down the fire then rolled over to yank the debris from his ankle. It was the shattered handle of his
vehicle’s auto-gun return, he realised. The pain was immense. He pulled at it and passed out momentarily. Coming
to, he realised that the shrapnel wasn’t going to come free from the bones of his foot without a surgeon. He chewed
down a handful of painkillers, and as the heady high smacked into his brain, he rolled over and began firing his
lasgun into the dune crest behind him.
Wheln blasted away from his vehicle’s turret next to Brostin, who had ditched his flamer for a lasrifle. Bandits
were running at them from a scoop of low-lying desert, and they shot everything that moved.
Mkendrik realised his guns were out as the last of the belt-feed whickered through the slot and the weapons
coughed dry. Bandit troops were all over him, charging up to take his machine. He pulled out his laspistol and shot
the first one through the head, gutting the second and blowing a knee off the third. Then he took a glancing wound in
the left shoulder that turned him sideways and knocked him to the deck. There was a roaring sound.
Meryn’s bike came over the rise in a puff of dust, landing hard, Caffran hammering the enemy with his guns. Meryn
slewed to the left as Caffran played the cannons around, exploding most of the enemy who were in eye-shot. The
others scrambled for cover.
“Come aboard!” Meryn shouted over the roar of his engine and Mkendrik leapt onto the flat-bed next to Caffran.
Meryn gunned the engine and they hammered straight at the enemy lines.
Tiring from the back of his vehicle, Logris, one of Mkoll’s elite scout brigade, realised his driver was losing it.
Fulke was crying out, screaming, resisting the hammer of weaponsfire. He slewed the bike around, away from the
action.
“Pull us back around! The war’s over there!” Logris bellowed Fulke said something absurd and gunned the motor
of the outrider towards the comparative safety of the convoy circle. Logris climbed forward over the ammo boxes
and feeder-cables strewn across the back-platform of the bike. He came upon the whimpering Fulke from behind and
slammed his head sideways into the armour panel of the pilot’s door. The bike shuddered to a sidelong halt as Fulke
went limp.
Logris spat on the driver. “Coward,” he said, then turned back. Enemy troops were scurrying across the cracked
dust-land towards him. He took out his lasgun and armed it.
“Let’s go,” he said to them, though they couldn’t hear.
Bragg pulled back from the window and released his finger on the trigger assembly. “What?” Tuvant asked.
“Get out,” Bragg said suddenly. “You and Milloom, get out of the cab and back onto the trailer.”
“Why?”
“Tire-patterns…”
“What?”
Bragg turned and cursed at the Caligulan driver. “Tire-patterns! Tire-patterns! They’re concentrating their fire on
the tractor units. It’s the freight they want! If you want to be safe, get into the sections they don’t dare shoot at!”
Tuvant and Milloom hurried back through the communicating door into the freight section. Bragg wiped his brow.
His hand was rich with sweat and soot. Over the vox-link, he ordered all his crews to do the same. The bandits want
this cargo… and so, Throne help me, they’ll be less sure of shooting at us when we’re part of it.
He yanked his autocannons off the sill and dragged them and the ammo boxes out onto the top of the freight unit.
“We’re gonna die here!” Tuvant said, looking out from the top of the freight unit at the hundreds of bandit troopers
who were advancing on their circle of machines.
“No, we’re not,” Bragg told him.
“You’re mad!” spat Tuvant. “We’re surrounded by them! Thousands of them! They’ll pick us off, every last man!”
Bragg sighed and closed his eyes.
The Maurader bombers came low over the ridge, annihilating the enemy with their belly-slung payloads.
“There are bandits… hiding out there in the deadlands, impossible to target.” Bragg smiled, repeating what Gaunt
had told him. “Unless there is something to draw them out and unify them Something like… this convoy.”
Tuvant looked at the huge ghost in disbelief. “We were bait?”
“Yes.”
“Kec you for using us!”
“I’m sorry. It was the colonel-commissar’s idea.”
Tuvant sagged down onto the freighter-top walkway.
Bragg hunkered next to him. Around them, sheets of incendiary bombs and phosphor fire scorched the hills. The
Imperial fighter-bombers shattered the air as they went supersonic and crossed the low hills to pull around for
another massacre run.
“Tuvant?”
Tuvant looked round at the giant.
“We were bait, but we still have a purpose. We’ll get this convoy through. Calphernia will rejoice, just like I said.
It’s just the colonel-commissar—”
Tuvant turned, eyes red. “I’m getting kec tired of hearing that title!”
“His name’s Gaunt. A good man. General Thoth ordered him to supervise the relief work here on your world. He
knew that couldn’t happen all the while the terrorists and bandit-clans were out here. So he set a lure. A lure of fat,
tasty freight trucks bound for Calphernia.”
“Great.”
“We got them all in one place so that the Navy air-wing could dispose of them. Be happy, man! We’ve won a great
victory here!”
Tuvant looked up at him. His face was pale. “All I know is I’ve been used as bait by your colonel-commissar. You
knew that all along.”
Bragg sat back against the guard rail, smelling the acid-rich reek of the burning napalm. “Yes. The bandits aren’t
working blind, you know. Hive workers in Aurelian are tipping them off as to the movement of supply convoys. Why
else do you think the colonel-commissar put me in charge of this run?”
Tuvant blinked at him, uncertain.
Bragg patted his vast chest with huge hands. “I’m big… I must be stupid. No brain. The sort of — what was it
again?—‘kec’ who would drive the convoy into trouble and then circle it in a defense position for easy pickings. The
sort of idiot who was likely to deliver the convoy right into the hands of the bandits.”
“Are you telling me you were part of the lure too?”
“The sweet part, the part they couldn’t resist. The part the workers on the inside would vox to their bandit friends
about. Convoy’s coming, boys and there’s an idiot in charge. Right, Milloom?”
Milloom glared back at them from his place against the rail. “Kec you!”
Bragg shook his great head. He held up a data-slate. “Friend of mine, Trooper Raglon… Comms-Officer Raglon,
was monitoring your cipher traffic. I’ve got you here, tipping off your bandit friends as to the time, schedule, makeup
and strength of this convoy. Colonel-Commissar Gaunt told me to do it.”
“Milloom?” Tuvant stammered.
A compact auto-pistol was suddenly in Milloom’s hand as he leapt up. “Kec you, Guard filth!”
Bragg was up in an instant, shielding Tuvant and swinging a massive fist at Milloom.
The gun went off. There was a sickening gristle-crack of impact. The shot went wild.
His face mashed beyond recognition, Hewn Milloom tumbled off the walkway of the freight unit and was dead
before his body snapped on the hard-packed desert twenty metres below.
Bragg turned back to Tuvant and helped him up. There was blood on his bulky knuckles. Behind them, the sky was
washed with heat-wash and cinder-smog from the bombing runs.
“He was a traitor. And a coward,” Bragg explained to Tuvant.
“Colonel-Commmissar Gaunt told you that, right?”
“No, I worked that out all by myself. Now, I believe we have a date with Calphernia Hive.”
A rusty dawn split the sky over Monthax. The air reminded Gaunt of the tall windows at the Schola Progenium back
on Ignatius Cardinal where he had been reared and trained years ago, after his father’s death. Smoky, like glass,
fading through scattered panels of reds and ochres to the frostier tones of mauve and purple high above where the
stars still twinkled. All it lacked was the lead-edged figure of some champion of the Imperium, some holy saint
frozen in an attitude of victory over the piled heads of the slain.
For a moment, he thought he heard the plainsong of the Schola choir, singing the dawn celebrant as the star Ignatius
rose. But he shook himself. He was mistaken. Across the long daybreak shadows that laced the stinking, muddy
trench lines, he heard men singing a rougher, more brutal Guard anthem as they set their cooking fires and made
breakfast. Milo was amongst them, edging the throaty music of the men’s husky, dreamy voices with silvery notes
from a slender reed-pipe.
Just as much an offering, just as celebrational for the providence of a new day, safe-delivered from night, Emperor
be thanked. Beyond the lines, the unyielding jungles steamed as the heat of the rising sun boiled the damp out of them.
Mist coated the dark trees. In that darkness of foliage and water and mud and flies, what miseries awaited the
Imperial Guard?
Near to him, one man wasn’t singing. Major Rawne sat back on a folded bedroll set by the fire before his tent. He
was shaving, using a bowl of hot water, a broken mirrored tile and the razor edge of his silver Tanith knife. He had
lathered with a tiny hunk of soap and Gaunt could hear the scratch of the blade against the bristles of his cheek and
throat.
The commissar found himself almost hypnotised by the practised, meticulous motions; the way Rawne held the
skin of his cheek taut with his free hand as he looked sidelong into the propped mirror, drew the knife in a short
scrape and then rattled it clean in the shallow bowl.
A knife against a knife, Gaunt thought. He always saw Rawne’s face as a thin dagger, sleek and handsome. A
dagger… or a snake, perhaps.
Both would be appropriate. Gaunt admired Rawne’s abilities, and indeed even his ruthlessness. But there was no
love lost. He wondered how many throats had been opened by the knife Rawne now stroked delicately across his
own vulnerable flesh. Watching him shave, without so much as a nick, it emphasised the dangerous control of the tall,
slender man. Precise, perfect, the tiny difference between a clean shave and killing stroke.
And with that knife in particular…
Rawne looked up and caught Gaunt’s eye. He made no other sign of recognition and continued with his work. But
Gaunt knew how dearly Rawne would love to rattle that blade clean of soap-foam and bristles, and plunge it into his
heart.
Or turn into a serpent and bite him.
Gaunt turned away. He would always have to watch his back against Rawne. Always, forever. It was the way of
things. Ibram Gaunt had a billion enemies out there, but the bitterest was at his side, amongst his own, waiting for the
moment to come where he could make a ghost of Gaunt.
SEVEN
PERMAFROST
There is a valley on Typhon Eight where frozen screams saw at the air, day and night, through eternity. The valley is
a glacial cleft, its sheer sides nine kilometres deep. Where the starlight catches the top flanks, the ancient ice is so
white, the eye can only take it briefly. Deeper, as it plunges, the ice becomes translucent blue, mauve, then crimson.
Algae forms, frozen billions of years before into the rock-ice, stain it with their dyes and fluids.
It is the wind that screams, shredded and sliced by the razor-edged outcrops of ice along the valley crest, twisted
and amplified by the gorge. Typhon Eight is an ice moon, its surface a crust of frozen water sometimes a hundred
kilometres deep. Below that, boiling oceans of hydrocarbons pulse with the tidal rhythms of the planetoid’s living
core.
The screaming loud in his ears, Rawne rolled and slipped down a slope of scarlet ice at the bottom of the valley.
The piercing wind raked at him, trying to steal his camo-cloak. Despite the cloak and his gloves and the insulation of
his cold-weather fatigues, he was numb and leaden. The feeling — or the lack of feeling — replaced the rawness of
an hour before and was no more welcome. He lay still, fumbling with his lasgun.
Ice crystals formed on the metal of the weapon. He could barely hold it.
More shots came his way. Rawne had become used to the peculiar sound the impacts made in this place: a wet
popping and a sizzle as superheated rounds punched into ice which melted around them and refroze. Blackened
wounds, perfect circles, dotted the red ice sheet around him. He slithered into a deeper depression in the icescape
and held himself low. More shots, low and desperate, one buzzing a hand’s breadth over his head.
Then silence, or as close to silence as the perpetual screaming would allow. He rolled onto his back and, with his
chin on his chest, looked back along the valley the way he had come. There was no sign of anyone or anything,
except a crumpled black shape one hundred metres behind him that he knew was Trooper Nylat.
Dead. They were all dead, and he was the last.
He wriggled up and took a sight. The lens of the lasgun spotter was cracked and filmed with ice, ice which had
formed from the moisture of his own eye. He pulled back, cursing. A day before, Trooper Malhoon had frozen his
eyeball to his sight while spotting for targets on the ice floes. He could still hear the man’s screams as they had
separated him from his weapon.
He fired a triple salvo blind, wayward, into the dark of the gorge. In answer, a dozen guns opened up on him, and
blew up an artificial blizzard in the ice-dust.
Caves: low, arched, steepled defiles in the ice-cliff wall carved by the slow shift of the crust. Short of breath and
with a shrapnel wound stinging his thigh, Rawne half-fell into the nearest and lay on his face until the cold ache of
the ice made him roll over. It abruptly seemed breathlessly hot in the cave. Rawne realised that it was because he
was suddenly shielded from the slicing wind. Though only a few degrees above zero in the ice cave, out of the wind
it felt almost tropical in there. He pulled off his cloak and his gloves and, after a moment, his insulated vest too. He
shuddered, damp and too hot, sweat built up under his insulating garments trickling like sauna moisture off his back.
He checked his leg. There was a hole in his fatigues at mid-thigh and it looked like he had been burnt by a melta.
Then he realised the blood had not clotted on the flesh wound. It had frozen. He snapped the black ice off his flesh
and, wincing as the action pinched, looked at the oozing wet gash in his leg.
Not for the first time in his military career and certainly not for the last, he cursed the name of Ibram Gaunt.
Rawne reached for his medi-pouch and pulled it open. He took the flesh clamps out and worked with them as the
medic, Dorden, had instructed them all during Foundation Training. But the wire clamps were frozen and his numb
fingers managed little more than to ping them off across the floor instead of opening them.
It took him an age to extract a needle from the sterile paper packets. He dropped four or five before he grasped
one, and then set it between his teeth as he tried to find the loose end of the surgical thread.
Finally, it was pinched between unfeeling fingers. He took the needle and tried to thread it. He’d have had more
chance making a bull’s-eye on a target ten kilometres away with a wrong-sighted lasgun. After twenty attempts, he
put the needle back between his teeth and tried to twist together the now frayed ends of the thread.
Something hit him hard from behind, smashing him head first into the snow floor.
He lay on his face, fazed, slowly becoming aware of the snorting and sniffling behind him. His tongue hurt and his
mouth was full of blood which drooled out and frosted down into the ice. A big shape was moving behind him.
He turned his head slowly and dared to take a look. Circumspect, sidelong, as one might do into a mirror whilst
shaving.
The ork was nearly three metres tall and almost as wide. Impossibly large muscles corded its shoulders and arms
and stinking furs swaddled its bulk. Its head was huge, twice the size of a human’s, thrust forward and seated on the
vast lower jaw. Blackened teeth stuck like chisel blades out of the rotten gums. He couldn’t see the eyes. He could
smell the reeking breath, the corrosive saliva that spattered and dripped from the half-open mouth.
Playing dead, he watched as it toyed with his medi-pouch, rooting through the contents with hands big enough to
break a human throat like a twig. It took out a roll of gauze and bit it munching and then spitting out.
It’s hungry, thought Rawne, and his guts iced and tightened at the idea.
Suddenly, it moved to him, pulling him up by the hair and jerking him back like a puppet, rummaging in his
clothing with the other hand for food pouches, rations, munitions.
Blood spilled out of Rawne’s jerked-open mouth, spattering down his chest. He tried to remain limp, but his left
hand crept down towards the knife sheathed at his waist. The huge ork jerked and twisted him like a sack of bones,
sniffing and gurgling behind his ear, hot breath on Rawne’s neck, rancid smell in his nose.
Rawne found his knife and slid it out. He must have tensed doing so because the ork froze and then muttered
something in its arcane tongue. Rawne moved to swing his knife, but the ork’s huge paw was suddenly around his
blade-hand, crushing it and slamming it into the icy wall beside them. Two slams and Rawne’s hand gave up. The
Tanith dagger whipped away.
The ork roared, a guttural bellow that deafened Rawne and shook his diaphragm. Holding him from behind, it
bear-hugged, pulling its arms apart, determined to rip his torso in two. Rawne screamed, fighting futilely at the
greater strength, tearing his arms free. He was dead, he knew that. Death was a moment away.
Pain made him reach into his mouth, to pull at whatever throbbed in his tongue. He found the end of the surgical
needle, protruding from the flesh of his tongue. He yanked it out. A shockingly long spurt of blood followed it. Then
he stabbed back behind his head with the little sliver of metal.
The ork screamed and dropped him. Rawne landed, spitting and coughing blood from his pulsing tongue. The ork
was flailing around the cave wildly, holding one eye that dribbled with clear fluid and stained ichor. The noise of its
rage was deafening in the ice-hole.
Rawne scrambled for a weapon, but the ork turned and sent him flying across the cave with a flat backhand.
Rawne hit the ice wall hard with his shoulders, upside down and horizontal. His shoulder blade cracked and he
dropped to the floor.
The ork charged him, one eye half-closed and oozing around the stub-eye of the surgical needle impaling it.
Rawne rolled.
His lasgun was on the far side of the cave, but his knife was in reach.
His knife. How many fights had he won with that? How many throats had he cut, how many hearts had he burst,
how many stomachs had he opened?
He reached it, grasped it, turned in a low crouch to meet the attacker, a gleeful look on his face.
The ork faced him, its back to the cave mouth, a huge, crude bolt-pistol in its ichor-spattered fist.
The ork spoke, slow, rumbling, alien. Rawne didn’t know what it said, but he knew what it meant.
There was a blinding flash and the roar of a weapon loosed in the confines of the cave.
Rawne had always wondered what it would feel like to take the killing hit. To be shot mortally. To die. But there
was no feeling. No sense.
In the blink of an eye, he saw the ork explode, its mid-section disintegrating in a burst of light.
It fell, almost in two parts. Its body fluids froze as it flopped to the ground.
There was a tall figure in the care entrance, blocking the light. “Major Rawne?”
Ibram Gaunt entered the cave and holstered his bolt-pistol.
It seemed that the commissar had fared no better than him. The ork warband had decided to take advantage of the
chaos of the crusade’s push to seize Typhon as part of its attempt to build a raiding foothold into the Sabbat Worlds.
Charged with destroying the menace, the Ghosts had deployed into the long gorges and ice-floes of the moon and
come undone. As Rawne’s platoon had been cut down along the eastern edge of the screaming valley, so Gaunt’s had
to the west. In retreat, the greenskins had proved the more determined adversaries.
The commissar and the major crouched down in the ice cave together. Rawne had made no sign of gratitude. In
many ways he knew he would rather be dead than remain beholden to the off-worlder.
“How’s your tongue?” Gaunt asked, getting a fire lit with chemical blocks. “Why?”
“You’re not saying much.”
Rawne spat. “It’s fine. A clean wound with a sharp instrument.” Truth was, his swollen tongue felt like a bedroll
in his mouth, but he would not let the commissar have the satisfaction of knowing his discomfort. But he could not
disguise the pain his leg gave him.
“Let me see to that,” Gaunt said.
Rawne shook his head.
“That was an order,” Gaunt sighed.
He moved over, pulling his own medi-pouch open. His clips were frozen too, but he warmed them over the
chemical flame and then pinched the lips of Rawne’s thigh wound shut. He sprayed the area with antiseptic from the
one-use flask. Rawne felt his limb go dead.
Then Gaunt warmed his numb fingers and threaded surgical cord into a fresh needle. He handed Rawne his dagger.
“Bite the hilt.”
Rawne did so and stayed silent as Gaunt sewed the torn flesh together.
Gaunt bit off the cord and tied it, wrapping a dressing over the wound. Rawne spat the dagger out.
Gaunt packed the kit away and then settled a kettle pan over the flames, dropping a scoop of ice into it.
“Seems to me Typhon has levelled us, major,” he said after a while.
“How so?”
“The high-born commissar, with all his airs and graces and rank, his schola training and his expertise; the low-life
Tanith gangster with his wiles and tricks and diversions — it’s put us on a level. Equals. Both fighting the same
hostility with the same chances.”
Rawne didn’t manage his retort. His tongue was too swollen and sore. He managed to spit again.
Gaunt smiled and watched the ice-water boil in the pan.
“Good. Maybe not. If you can still spit at me and hold me in contempt, we’re not equal. I can lower myself down
towards your level to help you… Feth, save you. But the day we’re both on a level, your level, I’ll kill myself.”
“Is that a promise?” Rawne asked.
Gaunt laughed. He dropped some dehydrated food cubes into the bubbling pan and stirred them.
Dry-powdered bean soup puffed and formed. He was still laughing as he poured the soup into two tin cups.
The wind rose as night fell. It howled outside the mouth of the cave, raising the volume and intensity of the screaming
They sat together in the dark, watching the fire. There were only four fuel-blocks left to feed the blaze and Gaunt was
being careful.
“You want to know some other differences between us, Rawne?”
Rawne wanted to say “No”, but his tongue was now too swollen and useless. He spat at Gaunt again instead.
Gaunt smiled and nodded down at the spittle freezing on the ice.
“There’s one: this place might be a ball of frozen moisture, but you won’t see me going around losing body
moisture like that. The wind will freeze you dry in a few hours. Conserve your body water. Stop spitting at me and
you might live.”
He held out a bowl of tepid water to Rawne and after a moment, the major took it and drank.
“Here’s another. It’s warm in here. Warmer than outside. But it’s still close to zero. You’re half-stripped and
you’re shivering.”
Gaunt was still dressed in his full uniform and his cloak was pulled around him. Rawne realised how numb he had
become and began to pull his vest and cloak around him again.
“Why?” the major asked thickly.
“Why? Because I know… I’ve fought through cold zones before.”
“Not that… why? Why would you want to keep me alive?” Gaunt was silent for a while.
“Good question…” he said at last. “Given that you’d like nothing better than to see me dead. But I’m a commissar
of the Imperial Guard, charged by the Emperor to keep his fighting legions able and intact in the face of battle. I
won’t let you die. That’s my job. That’s why I saved you here, that’s why I saved the Tanith from the destruction of
their world.”
There was a long silence, broken only by the crackling chemical bricks of the fire.
“You know I’ll never see it that way,” Rawne said, his voice cold and small. “You left Tanith to die. You didn’t let
us stand and fight. I will never forgive you that.”
Gaunt nodded. “I know.” Then, after a moment, “I wish it wasn’t so.”
Rawne rolled himself up into a cleft of the ice cave and pulled the cloak around him. He felt only one thing. Hate.
Somehow, somewhen, dawn had come up. Thin, frail light poked into the cave.
Gaunt was asleep, huddled down under his cloak, covered in frost. Rawne slowly got to his feet, fighting the ache
in his bones and the almighty cold. The fire had long since gone out.
He edged around the cave, staring down at Gaunt. Pain ebbed through his sewn leg, his shoulders, his mouth. The
pain cleared the fuzziness of his head and made him sharp. He picked up his Tanith knife, wiped the frost from it, and
knelt to place its blade against Gaunt’s throat.
No one would know. No one would ever find the body. And even if they did…
Gaunt shuddered in his sleep. He spoke the name of Tanith twice as his eyelids rolled and flicked. Then he spoke,
curling up on himself: “Won’t let them die! No, not all of them! In the name of the Emperor, Sym!”
Then his voice died away into mumbling. Rawne’s hand tensed on the knife. He hesitated.
Gaunt spoke again, his dreaming voice a low monotone. “No, no, no, no… it’s burning… burning… I would
never… I would never….”
“Never what?” Rawne hissed, about to pull the dagger up in a quick killing slice.
“Tanith… In the name of the Emperor…”
Rawne twisted where he crouched. He pulled the dagger up, not in a killing slice but in an arc that threw it across
at the mouth of the cave and impaled the throat of the ork creeping inside towards them.
As it fell back, gurgling, Rawne heard raucous baying from outside. He kicked Gaunt in the ribs to rouse him and
swung up his lasgun, firing wildly at the cave mouth.
“They’re on us, Gaunt, you bastard!” he screamed. “They’re on us!”
Eight fierce, wordless minutes, weapons spitting and cracking in their hands. Gaunt roused from deep, troubled sleep
to combat readiness with the speed of long experience. Six orks had come right up to the mouth of the cave, and
without cover could do little but shoot and die. Caught in the mouth of the cave, the two Imperial soldiers had better
cover and the advantage of the slope. Huge carcasses fell and slid, smoking down the crimson ice.
Rawne dropped the last of them and turned to find Gaunt scanning the valley floor with his scope.
“We can’t stay here,” the commissar said. That exchange will bring them from all around.
“We have cover here,” Rawne argued.
Gaunt kicked the ice at the cave mouth. “All we have is a tomb. Get enough of them around to pen us in and they’ll
bring the ice-cliff down and bury us. We have to move. And fast.”
They ditched bed rolls and anything else it would take too long to repack. Gaunt prioritised ammo, food, Rawne’s
small satchel of tube-charges, their cold weather gear. In less than a minute they were fleeing down the slope
outside, cloaks flying, into the dawn chill.
Twelve kilometres away, the steep angles of the rising sun lit the far wall of the valley, but they were in twilight
here, a frosty darkness in which the scarlet ice around them glowed and shone like marble. Or meat in a butcher’s
shop. Distantly, the crump of weapons fire. They hugged the valley wall, using ice rocks as cover as the wind wailed
and agonised around them.
A kilometre or so from the cave, they rested, sweating in their insulated fabrics, crouched down in the cover of a
block splinter fallen from high above.
Rawne wiped the ork blood off his knife and cut a hank of cloth from the edge of his stealth cape. He’d lost a
glove somewhere, and his hand was aching and raw with the cold. He bound the cloth around his hand, tying it tight
like a mitten.
Gaunt touched his shoulder and pointed back the way they had come. Lights, big gleaming lamps, bobbed and
bounced along the valley floor: vehicles. The wind was too loud to make out engine notes.
“Come on,” said Gaunt.
From shelter, a scoop cut in the ice floor, they watched the vehicles pass five hundred metres away. Four big ork
machines, black and pumping blacker smoke from crude combustion engines. Thick-treaded tyres with chains gave
the front end of the machines traction, and the rear sections were carried on sled runners or tracks. Each vehicle
carried at least two other warriors beside the driver, and hefty weapons on pintle or turret mounts. They howled
past, spraying up sheets of ice particles, close enough for the men to see the tribal markings on the battered flanks of
the machines and smell the stink of their burning oil.
Once they had passed, Gaunt made to continue, but Rawne pulled him back.
“They know how fast we can run,” he said. Sure enough, a roar reached them over the howling wind a minute or
so later and the vehicles sped back past they way they had come, searching back over the ground to see what they
had missed. One pulled away west and two more raced onwards. The fourth curved around in a spray of ice and
moved towards them to search along the wall of the valley.
They were trapped. They could not run because there was nowhere to run to without exposing themselves to the
orks if they rose from the scoop. Huddled low, they watched.
The ork half-sled slowed and one of the burly warriors jumped down, running alongside the vehicle, firing into
caves along the valley wall. The other warrior traversed the heavy weapon of the trundling vehicle from side to side.
Closer…
Gaunt turned to Rawne and nodded to his lasgun. “More range, better sight. Take the weapon’s operator.”
“Not the driver?”
“If his gunner’s dead, all he can do is drive. If he dies, the gunner can still fire. Target the gunner… and when
you’ve got him, re-aim on the foot soldier.”
Rawne nodded and breathed hard on his sight to warm the lens. He clicked in a fresh energy clip as quietly as he
could. Though the wind was screaming, the hard metal clack would carry like a shot.
He saw Gaunt carefully doing the same with the sickle-pattern magazine of his bolt-pistol.
The motor sled turned their way, its harsh lights catching the lip of their ice scoop, making the scarlet ice
translucent and all the more like fresh meat. Rawne took his aim. He knew he was no marksman like Larkin or Elgith,
but he was passable. Even so, he let the sled slip closer in before he felt confident of a shot. His only target, the
silhouette of the vehicle behind the lights. Closer… almost on them. Rawne fired.
His blazing shot hit the black shape behind the lights. There was a double flash and then a series of loud, fierce
explosions, like gunshots. The sled veered sideways, bumping to a halt. Rawne realised they had been gun shots. He
had hit the gunner squarely, but his shot had passed through the weapon mount on the way, exploding the heavy bolter
and igniting the ammo drum. The gunner’s smoking corpse hung from the burning weapon and, even as they watched,
stray rounds superheated and went off like fireworks. The driver was also dead, the back of his skull and neck
riddled with shrapnel from the exploding ammo.
Gaunt and Rawne leaped up out of the scoop and ran towards the motorised sled. The ork left on foot was running
their way, firing from the hip. Bolt rounds whizzed and sang around them, fizzling into the ice. Yelling as he charged
the advancing ork, Rawne fired on full auto, his lasgun bucking as he carried it low against his side. Two laser shots
spun the monstrous ork off his feet and dropped him on the ice, where he lay twitching.
Gaunt reached the sled, screwing up his nose at the smell of burning flesh. The gun and the gunner were still
burning, but fire had not spread to the rest of the machine. He stepped forward, but darted back as another round
went up. Then it was quiet.
He leaped up onto the tail-boards and put a point-blank round through the gunner’s back, though he was sure the
ork was dead. He had heard too many tales of the greenskin resilience to injury. Gaunt pitched the cadaver off the
platform onto the ice, then grabbed hold of the smouldering, ruined weapon. There was a handle release to free the
gun and its drums from the mount. He heaved on it, his hands slipping in thick grease. No human strength had
tightened this latch. He put his weight behind it, cursing and grunting, expecting another round to explode in his face
at any moment.
The latch gave. With a gasp, and an effort that tore ligaments in his back and arms, he hefted the entire gun and
ammo carriage off the metal bars of the mount frame and tipped it over off the vehicle. As it landed, three more
rounds went off, one scudding across the surface of the ice in slithering jags like a phosphorescent sprite.
Gaunt’s gloves had caught fire from the red-hot metal and he jerked them off, throwing them aside. He clambered
forward onto the driver’s position and tried to pull the driver’s body out of the cockpit. Nearly four hundred kilos of
dead weight refused to budge.
He looked back at Rawne, in time to see him finishing the fallen footsoldier with his blade. Gaunt yelled him over,
his voice lost in the keening wind.
Together they pried the driver’s corpse free and flopped it into the ice. It had already begun to freeze and fell like
a sack of rocks. Gaunt got into the cockpit, felt the space roomy and too big for a human operator. It stank of sweat
and blood in the enclosed cabin. He tested the handlebar grips and found the foot pedals. His first tries at control
revved the engine to a scream and then braked the sled in a jolt that threw the cursing Rawne onto his back in the
troop bay behind him. Then he had the measure of it. It was a crude version of the landcars he had driven with his
father back home, years ago. There was a foot throttle and also a foot brake, though that did little but dig a massive
spike down from the underside into the ice to retard motion. The anchor would only work in conjunction with dethrottling.
With the engine racing, the spike would shatter and pull the guts out from under the motor sled. The gears,
three of them, were set by a twist on the left handlebar grip. There were gauges on the crude dash calibrated in
greenskin script which he couldn’t read or understand, but he began to measure the way the juddering needles spiked
and dipped.
“Hold on, major!” he warned and raced them off towards the distant end of the valley. Rawne, in the back, clung
on tight, the wind whipping his face and neck.
Gaunt focussed all his will into control. The massive machine bucked and jinked on every irregularity in the ice,
but Gaunt quickly came to judge the way ahead, and knew what conditions would skid them round, or slide them, or
make them spin treads. There was no power assist to the steering, and he fought it. It was beyond his strength to keep
the steering true and he realised that he would never be able to drive the machine as fast as the stronger orks could. It
fought too much and his strength was human, not inhuman.
They rocked and bumped and jolted. More than once, they spun out as he failed to keep the drive wheels true and
the back end came around in a flurry of ice shards. After the last such lapse, the raging engine stalled and refused to
restart. There was a starter switch under the steering column, but it flopped slackly.
Gaunt peered down and found the kick start stirrup to the left of the brake. He bent and flopped it down, trying it
with his boot.
“Gaunt!”
He looked up. Rawne was standing on the flatbed, pointing back. A kilometre away, three dark shapes were
kicking up ice-smoke as they raced after them. The orks, with their superior strength and experience of the snow
machines, were making better speed in their pursuit.
Gaunt kicked viciously at the starter bar time and again until the engine yowled alive, and then hastily adjusted the
protesting throttle.
They spun again, fishtailed, then chugged away. Gaunt pushed the machine as fast as he thought he could control it.
Another misread flaw in the ice, another spin out, another stall, and they would be overrun. Or overturned, necks
snapped under the rolling tonnage of the motor sled.
They came out of the night shadows of the valley onto the wide expanse of the ice floe. Sunlight seared them and
Gaunt and Rawne were blind for a moment, even after they pulled their glare goggles down.
Ahead was the ice sea. White, scarlet, purple, green in patches, the ice was scalloped and curled like foam.
Thousands of kilometres of open, frozen sea, spread out to a horizon where it met the blackness of space. The
sunlight was a hostile white menace.
The sea and all its waves had frozen as if in mid-ebb, and now the sled bounced and flew, rose and fell, across the
dimpled peaks of breakers that had frozen a millennium before. The motor sled over-revved each time it left the
ground and kicked ice chunks each time it landed. Gaunt could barely control the machine as the drive wheels and
slithering skids kissed ice again. Rawne had thought about firing back at the ork machines closing on them, but the
bumpy ride had thrown him to the greasy deck and it was all he could do to cling on and lie flat. Face to the metal
deck-boarding, he saw the punctures for the first time. Shrapnel holes, from the exploding bolter drums. There was a
stink of oil rising from them. He crawled, hand over hand, to the tail gate as the sled jumped and crashed, and saw a
staining line of brown marking their wake.
He turned and yelled. “We’re bleeding fuel! The tank is punctured!”
Gaunt cursed. Now he understood what one of the gauges — the one with the rapidly dipping needle — really
meant.
The ork pursuit was closing. Heavy bolter rounds and other explosive munitions rained down around them,
blowing geysers of ice and steam up from the frozen sea.
Gaunt realised his naked, glove-less hands were beginning to freeze solid around the steering grips. The pain
brought tears to his eyes, tears which froze behind his goggles and blurred his vision, biting his cheeks.
Two over-shot projectiles from the orks brought bigger explosions to the left of them. Sprays of glutinous, boiling
liquid erupted far into the air from their impacts. Gaunt saw that the rushing landscape ahead of them was duller
blue, more like frosted glass, cracked and crazed.
They made the next rise. Then the engine coughed, spluttered, died. They slid sideways in a long, wide
deceleration, ice gouged up by Gaunt’s desperate use of the anchor. He kicked the starter. The engine flared once,
then died forever in a cough of stinking oil smoke. Dry rotors and cylinders burst and ground.
The ork machines were a hundred metres behind them. They could hear them whooping in victory. For the first
time, Rawne realised that the wind was no longer screaming now they were out of the valley.
Gaunt clambered out of the cockpit. “Tube-charges, Rawne!” he bawled.
“What?”
Gaunt pointed to where other wide shots from their pursuers dug steaming vents from the glassy ice.
“The ice is thin here. We’re riding over a thin skin. The living ocean is right below us.”
Another shot whinnied down and exploded the steering section of the sled where Gaunt had just been sitting.
“Now!”
Rawne understood the commissar’s idea just as suddenly as he recognised the insanity of it. But the orks were
only fifty paces away. Rawne realised the desperation too.
He had twelve stick mines in his satchel and he pulled them all out, handing half to Gaunt. He kicked the glass off
one of the vehicle’s lamps and used the white-hot filament to light the fuses. The two humans took three in each hand
and hurled them as far and as hard as they could, scattering them wide.
Twelve huge explosions, each big enough to kill a tank. They split the world apart. But more particularly, they
burst and shattered the ice. The steaming hydrocarbon sea, so close beneath, rushed up to plume and boil and froth in
the air.
One ork machine cartwheeled, an explosion taking it over It tore itself and its occupants into fragments as it
landed on ice that was beginning to separate and fracture in huge bobbing sections.
Another dodged the rain of blasts and flew straight off the edge of an ice chunk into the sea, where it vaporised
and burned. The last stopped short, the riders bellowing, just missing a gap in the ice. Then the ice chunk it sat on
collapsed and they all dropped shrieking into the frothing, flaming liquid.
The ice was coming apart, fracturing into chunks that burned and steamed as the rising ocean, locked in for so
many thousands of years, welled up and conquered the surface. On the back of their dead machine, Gaunt and Rawne
leapt and yelled in triumph until they realised the ice collapse was spreading their way fast.
The ocean fizzed and thrashed up around their sled runners and the motor-sled dipped suddenly. Gaunt jumped
clear onto a nearby iceberg, newly formed and sizzling in the hideous liquid.
He held out his hand. Rawne jumped after him, grabbing Gaunt’s hand, allowing himself to be pulled clear as their
ruined machine slid backwards into the liquid and exploded.
“We can’t stay here,” Gaunt began. It was true. Their iceberg was rocking and dissolving like an ice cube in hot
water. They leapt off it to the next, and then the next, hoping that the fractured sections of ice would remain intact
long enough for them to reach some kind of shore. Vapours gasped and billowed around them.
On the fourth, Rawne slipped and Gaunt caught him just centimetres from the frothing water.
They made the next floe and Rawne moved ahead. He heard a cry behind him and turned to see the ice plate
upending and Gaunt sliding backwards on his belly, clawing the surface as he slipped down towards the seething
ocean of hydrocarbons.
He could let him die. Rawne knew that. No one would know. No one would ever find the body. And even if they
did… Besides, he couldn’t reach him.
Rawne pulled out his knife and hurled it. It stuck fast, blade down, in the tilting ice just above Gaunt’s hand and
gave the commissar a grip. Gaunt pulled himself up on the dagger and then got his foot braced on it until he could
reach up and take Rawne’s hand. The major hauled him up high enough for the pair to make a safe jump to the next
berg. This was larger, more solid. They clung to it, side by side, panting and out of strength.
The ice chunk behind them fell back into the ocean, taking Rawne’s silver dagger with it.
They sat together on top of the iceberg for six hours. Around them, the ocean refroze and its seething hiss died away.
But they could go nowhere. The reforming ice skin was but a few centimetres thick — thick enough to enclose the
lethal liquid but not so hard as to bear weight. The distress beacon from Gaunt’s pack blinked and sighed behind
them on the top of the ice chunk.
“I owe you,” Gaunt said at last.
Rawne shook his head. “I don’t want that.”
“You pulled me up there. Saved me. I owe you for that. And frankly, I’m surprised. I know you’d like to see me
dead and this was an opportunity that spared your hands from blood.”
Rawne turned to look at Gaunt, his face half-lit by the dwindling starlight. His cheeks and chin seemed to catch the
light more like a dagger now than ever before. And his eyes were hooded like a snake’s.
“One day, I will kill you, Gaunt,” he said simply. “I owe it to Tanith. To myself. But I’m no murderer and I respect
honour. You saved me from that greenskin in the cave and so I owed you.”
“I would do as much for any man in my command.”
“Precisely. You may think I’m a malcontent, but I stay loyal to the Emperor and the Guard always. I owed you and,
though I hate myself for it, I repaid. Now we’re even.”
“Even,” Gaunt murmured, measuring the word softly in his mouth. “Or level, perhaps.”
Rawne smiled. The day will come, Ibram Gaunt. But it will be on equal terms. Level terms, as you put it. I will
kill you, and I will rejoice in it. But now is not the time.”
“Thank you for being so forthright, Rawne.” Gaunt pulled out his Tanith knife, the knife given to him by Corbec
when they first mustered for war.
Rawne tensed, jerking back. But Gaunt held it out to him, hilt first.
“You lost yours. I know any Tanith would be incomplete without a long blade at his hip.”
Rawne took the knife. Me held it in his hands for a second, spun it with deft fingers, and then slid it into his empty
belt sheath.
“Do with it as you see fit,” Gaunt said, turning his back on Rawne.
“I will… one of these days,” replied Major Elim Rawne.
The Infirmary lay well back from the main embankment defence here on Monthax. Like Gaunt’s modular hut, it was
raised out of the soupy ground on stacks. Long, swoop-roofed, the Infirmary’s wall planking was washed an arsenic
green, while the roof was black with bitumen. Grey blast-curtains protected the doors and window hatches, and
bunches of pipes and cables carried in air from the scrubbers and power from the chattering turbine behind the place.
Symbols of the Imperium, and of the medical corps, were stencilled on the walls, for all that Chaos would notice
them if they stormed over the bulwark. Gaunt climbed up a metal ladder next to the rush-ramp for stretcher parties,
and pushed inside through the screens and heavy curtaining.
Inside he found a paradise and a surprise. It was by far the coolest and most fragrant place in the camp, probably
the coolest, most fragrant place on Monthax itself. Sweet odours of sap rose from the fresh timber of the floor and the
clean rush matting. There was a scent of antiseptic fluids, rubbing alcohol and some purifying incense that burned in
a bowl next to the small shrine set near the western end. The forty beds were made up and empty. Pale, artificial
light shone from gauze-hooded lamps.
Gaunt wandered the length of the ward and let himself through a screen door at the end. There, access led off into
storerooms, latrines, a small operating theatre, and the Chief Medical Officer’s quarters. Dorden wasn’t in his little,
tidy office, but Gaunt saw his distinctive handiwork in the careful arrangement of medical texts, chart folders, and
the labels-front regimentation of the flasks and bottles in the locked dispensary cabinet.
The medic was in the operating theatre, polishing the stain less-steel surface and blood drains of the theatre table.
Gleaming surgical tools, an autoclave and a ressussitrex unit sat in corners.
“Commissar Gaunt!” Dorden looked up in surprise. “Can I help you?”
“As you were, just a routine walkabout. Anything to report, any problems?”
Dorden stood up straight, balling the polishing cloth in his hands and dropping it into a ceramic bowl of
disinfectant. “Not one, sir. Come to inspect the place?”
“Certainly an improvement on the last few facilities you’ve had to work with.”
Dorden smiled. He was a small, elderly man with a trimmed grey beard and genial eyes that had seen more pain
than they deserved. “It’s empty yet.”
“I admit that surprised me when I came in. So used to seeing your places overflowing with wounded, Emperor
spare us.”
“Give it time,” Dorden said, ominously. “It unnerves me, I have to say. Seeing all those empty beds. I praise the
Golden Throne I’m idle, but idleness doesn’t suit me. Must’ve polished and swept the place a dozen times already.”
“If that’s the worst work you have here on Monthax, we may all give thanks.”
“May we all indeed. Can I offer a cup of caffeine? I was about to light the stove.”
“Perhaps later, when I come back this way. I have to inspect the magazines. There are stirrings beyond us.”
“So I heard last night. Later then, sir.”
Gaunt nodded and left. He doubted he’d have time to stop by later, and he doubted too that this little paradise
would remain unsullied much longer.
Dorden watched the commissar leave, and stood for a while longer surveying the clean ward with its empty cots.
Like Gaunt, he had no illusions as to the horror-hole this place would become. It was inevitable.
He closed his eyes, and for a moment he could see the floor matting drenched in black blood; the soiled sheets; the
moaning, screaming faces. And the silent ones.
His nostrils seemed to detect blood and burned flesh for a second, but it was just the incense.
Just the incense.
EIGHT
BLOOD OATH
The fallen men, scattered on the roadway and across the low, muddy fields of Nacedon, looked like they were
wearing black mail armour. But they weren’t. The meat-flies were busy. They covered the flesh like seething black
links of armour. They glittered furiously, moving like a single thing.“Medic!”
Tolin Dorden looked away from the flies. The afternoon sky lay wide and misty over the low, flat fens. Trackways
and field boundaries were marked with dykes and hedge ways, all of them ruined and overrun with razor-posts,
concertina wire and churned tank paths. The mist smelled of thermite powder.
“Medic!” The call again. Sharp and insistent, from down the roadway. Slowly, Dorden turned and trudged from
the gutter of the road where, for a hundred metres, more corpses lay twisted and crumpled and coated in flies.
He advanced towards the buildings, feth, but he’d seen enough of this war now, no matter what the world. He was
tired and he was spent. Sixty years old, older by twenty years than any of the other Ghosts. He was weary: weary of
the death, the fighting, weary of the young bodies he had to patch back together. Weary, too, of being regarded as a
father by so many men who had lost their own at the fall of Tanith.
Smoke clogged the late afternoon sky across the low fields. He approached the old red-brick buildings with their
blown-out windows and crumpled walls. It had been a farm complex once, before the invasion. A feudal estate with
a main house, outbuildings and barns. Agricultural machinery lay rusting and broken in waterlogged swine pens. A
wide trench gully and a double fence of seared flak-boards topped with more spools of wire enclosed the complex
in a horseshoe, with the northern side, the one that faced away from the frontline, open. Ghosts stood point all
around, weapons ready. Trooper Brostin nodded him inside.
Dorden passed a sandbagged gunnery post from which the weapon had been hastily removed and entered the first
of the buildings, the main house, through a doorway that had been shot out of the brick by sustained las-fire. More
flies, billowing in clouds in the afternoon sunlight. The smell of death he was so, so used to. And other smells:
antiseptic, blood, waste.
Dorden stepped across a tiled floor. Half the tiles were broken, littered with glass and pools of oil that shimmered
rainbow colours. Corbec loomed out of the shadows nearby, shaking his weary head. “Doc,” he acknowledged.
“Colonel.”
“Field hospital…” Corbec said, gesturing around himself. Dorden already knew as much. “Anyone alive?”
“That’s why I called for you.”
Corbec led him through to a vaulted hallway. The various stenches were stronger in here. Perhaps five dozen men
lay on pallet beds in the chamber, half-lit by pallid yellow sunlight that streaked down through shattered lights in the
sloping roof. Dorden walked the length of the room and then back.
“Why have they been left here?” he asked.
Corbec shot him a questioning look. “Why do you think? We’re all retreating. Too much to carry. Can you… sort
them?”
Dorden cursed quietly. “These men are what?”
“Bluebloods. Volpone 50th. You remember those devils from Voltemand? Their command units pulled out this
morning, as Per orders.”
“And they left the wounded here?” Corbec shrugged. “Seems so, Doc.”
“What kind of animal leaves his sick and wounded behind to die?” Dorden spat, moving to change the dressings
on the nearest man.
“The human kind?” Corbec asked.
Dorden looked round sharply. “This isn’t funny. Corbec. It’s not even whimsical. Most of these men will live with
the proper attention. We’re not leaving them.”
Corbec groaned softly. He rubbed the top of his scalp, folding the thick black hair between his big, swarthy
fingers. “We can’t stay here, Doc. Commissar’s orders…”
Dorden turned and looked at the colonel with fierce, old eyes. “I’m not leaving them,” he stated plainly. Corbec
seemed to start to say something, then hesitated and decided better of it. “See what you can do for them,” he said, and
left Dorden to his work.
Dorden was treating a leg wound when he heard the crunch of gravel on the roadway outside and the rumble of a
troop carrier. He looked up to locate the source of the sound only after he had finished what he was doing.
“Thank you, sir,” said the young man whose leg he had treated. The boy was pale and sallow, too weak to rise
from his pallet bed.
“What’s your name?” Dorden asked.
“Culcis, sir. Trooper, Blueblood.” Dorden was sure that Culcis would have wanted to punctuate that statement
with an exclamation mark, but he was too weak to manage it.
“I’m Dorden. Medic. Tanith. You need me, Trooper Culcis, you call my name.”
The boy nodded. Dorden went outside, approaching the Chimera parked below the leaning walls. Corbec was
speaking to the tall figure perched on top.
The figure moved, dropped down to the soil, began to march towards him: Gaunt, his cap on, his face a shadow,
his long coat flying.
“Sir!” Dorden said.
“Dorden — Corbec says you won’t move.”
“Sixty-eight wounded here, sir. Can’t leave them; won’t leave them.”
Gaunt took Dorden’s arm and led him across the muddy yard to the side wall that looked out across trampled
farmland and vacant swine pens towards the setting suns beyond.
“You must, Dorden. Enemy forces are half a day behind us. General Muller has called us all to retreat. We can’t
carry them with us. I’m sorry.”
Dorden shook off the commissar’s grip. “So am I,” he said.
Gaunt turned away. For a moment, Dorden thought the commissar might round on him and discipline him with a
fist. But he didn’t. Instead, the man sighed. On reflection, Dorden knew violence wasn’t Gaunt’s first or chosen way
of command. The endless war and his experience of other officer cadres in the field had soured Dorden’s
expectation, something he wasn’t proud of.
Gaunt looked back at the medic. “Corbec told me you’d say as much. Took, the counter-push for Nacedon is
scheduled for tomorrow night. Then, and only then, Emperor willing, we’ll retake this land and drive the enemy
back.”
“Few of them will last the night and day unattended. And none if they are found and attended by the Chaos filth!”
Gaunt took off his cap and smoothed his cropped blond hair. The dying suns-light silhouetted his angular profile,
but kept his internal thoughts in shadow. “You have my respect, medic. You’ve always had it, since the Founding
Fields even. The only Ghost who refuses to bear arms, the only man who can keep us alive. The Ghosts owe you,
many of them owe you their lives. I owe you for that. I’d hate to have to give you an order.”
“Then don’t, commissar. You know I’ll refuse it. I’m a medic first and a Ghost second. Back on Tanith, as a
community practitioner, I worked for thirty years ministering to the sick, the infirm, the new-born and the weak in the
Beldane District and County Pryze. I did it because I took an oath at the Medical College in Tanith Magna. You
understand allegiances and oaths, commissar. Understand mine.”
“I understand the weight of the medical oath well enough.”
“And you’ve honoured it! Never asked me to break my vow on confidentiality over men with private problems…
drink, pox, mind-troubles… you’ve always let me do as my oath bids. Let me now.”
Gaunt replaced his cap. “I can’t leave you here to die.”
“But you’d leave these men to die?”
“They’re not the Ghosts’ chief medic!” Gaunt spat the answer and then fell silent.
“A doctor is vowed to serve any injured. Oh, I swore to the Emperor, on the Founding Fields, to serve him and
you and the Imperial Guard. But I’d already sworn to the Emperor to uphold life. Don’t make me break that vow.”
Gaunt tried logic. “Our illustrious forces were routed on the delta at Lohenich. We are fleeing before a massed
Chaos army that thunders at our heels, barely half a day away. You’re a non-combatant. How could you hold this
place?”
“With words, if I have to. With volunteers, if any will stay and you’ll allow it. After all, it’s only until tomorrow
night. Until your counter-push retakes this place. Or was that a lie? Propaganda?”
Gaunt said nothing for a while, tilting his tall bulk into the evening suns, adjusting his muddy coat. Then he turned
back to the old medic.
“No lie. We will retake this land, and beyond. We will drive them back as they come to us. But to leave you out
here, even for a night…”
“Don’t think of me. Think of the Volpone wounded in there.”
Gaunt did. It didn’t change his mind much. “They would have had us butchered—”
“Don’t go to that place!” Dorden warned. “Hate has no place between allies. These are men, Troopers, valuable
soldiers. They could live to fight again, to turn another conflict for the better. Leave me to care for them, with
whoever you can spare. Leave me, and come back for us all.”
Gaunt cursed. “I’ll give you a squad. I can spare no more. Ten men, volunteers. If it doesn’t come to ten, tough.
Muller will have my head for leaving any in the field as it is.”
“I’ll take whatever I can get,” Dorden said. “Thank you.”
Gaunt strode away abruptly, then turned, came back and took Dorden’s hand tightly in his own.
“You’re a brave man. Don’t let them take you alive… and don’t make me regret allowing you to be too brave.”
Gaunt and the retreating lines of Ghosts passed on and then they were alone. Dorden was working in the long hall,
and only noticed the passing of time as the sunshine through the skylights faded to blue and dusk fell. He lit lamps on
crates placed between the wounded and went outside into the yard. Overhead, alien stars were coming out in the
mauve sky.
He saw three Ghosts at first: Lesp, Chayker and Toskin, who acted as his orderlies and were skilled field medics.
They were sorting through the medical supplies Gaunt had left for them. Dorden had half-expected them to volunteer
and stay, hoped for it, but to see his three staffers working as usual was refreshing and uplifting. He crossed to them,
meaning to carry on as normal and ask about the supply level, but all he found in his throat was thanks. Each one
smiled, took his hand as he offered it, grunted an acknowledgement of duty. Dorden was proud of them.
He started to give them dispersal instructions, and began to run through the needs of the sick in priority order,
when other Ghosts stepped into view: Mkoll, the chief scout and Dorden’s closest friend in the unit, accompanied by
Troopers Brostin, Claig, Caffran and Gutes. They had just finished a patrol sweep of the horseshoe boundary and
were preparing to dig in for the night.
Dorden greeted Mkoll. “You needn’t have stayed.”
“And leave you alone here?” Mkoll laughed. “I’ll not have the records say ‘Medic Dorden died and where was
his friend, the warrior Mkoll?’ The commissar asked for volunteers and so we volunteered.”
“I’ll not forget this, however short my life,” Dorden replied. “We have the flank guarded well,” Mkoll told
Dorden, indicating the double fence. “All ten of us.”
“Ten?”
“That’s what the colonel-commissar allowed. Us five, your three, and the other two. All of the Ghosts were
arguing over who could stay, did you know? Everyone volunteered for the duty.”
“Everyone? Not Major Rawne, I’d bet!”
Mkoll grinned ruefully, “All right, not everyone. But there was a scramble for places. Gaunt finally decided on
first come, first served. So you got your three, me, Brostin, Claig, Caffran and Gutes. Plus Tremard, on watch at the
gates. And…”
“And?”
Dorden whipped round, sensing someone was suddenly behind him. He looked up into the smiling bearded face of
Colm Corbec.
“And me. So, Doc, you’re in charge. How do we play this?”
Night fell. The air cleared. Distantly, carrion-dogs howled. Three or more moons rose and set, duelling with each
others’ orbits. The darkness was clear and cold and smelled of death. Far away, on the southern horizon, amber
clouds thumped and boiled, a storm approaching. A mighty land army was moving towards them. That, and a real
storm. Lightning shuddered the sky in hazes of white-flash. The air became heavy and sweet.
Inside the farmhouse, one of the Bluebloods spasmed and died. Dorden was fighting for that life, his apron-smock
slick with spurting blood. There was nothing he or Lesp could do.
Dorden stepped back from the cooling corpse and handed bloodied instruments to Lesp. “Record time and manner
of death, and the name and number from the tags,” he said darkly “Emperor willing, we can pass it to the Volpone
adjutant’s office and they can adjust their records.”
Lesp snorted. “The Bluebloods have doubtless marked all these as dead already.”
Lesp was a tall, thin man from Tanith Longshore, with cold blue eyes and an Adam’s apple that looked like a knee
in his slender neck. He’d been a fisherman back on the Lost Place, part of a sea-fishing family which plied the ocean
currents beyond the archipelago. He owned a fierce skill with a sailcloth and net needle, and an almost surgical
knack with a blade learned from gutting fish back in those days. Dorden had put those skills to use in the name of
healing when he had co-opted Lesp as an orderly. Lesp had taken to it well, and enjoyed his work alongside the chief
medic.
Dorden took all the willing, able help he could get. Most of the trained medics who had founded with the Ghosts
on Tanith had never made it off-world. Originally, the only fully qualified medics had been Dorden, Gherran and
Mtane, with twenty other troopers trained as field medics. Dorden had interviewed and studied all of the surviving
men to recruit for the badly needed medical staff. Without devoted, constantly learning amateurs like Lesp, Foskin
and Chayker, the health of the regiment would have failed long ago.
Mtane and Gherran had moved on with Gaunt’s main force, though both had wanted to stay. Losing all three
trained medics in one rash act was more than Gaunt would tolerate.
Dorden stepped out into the muddy yard and, as if on cue, the heavens opened and sheeting rain hammered down
on him, washing another’s blood out of his tunic. He stood there, dripping, as the downpour eased a little.
“You’ll get wet out there,” came a voice from nearby.
Dorden swung round to face Corbec, who was smoking a cigar in the cover of the slumping side-roof. All Dorden
could see was the shape and the red coal of the light.
Dorden crossed to him. Corbec offered up a waxy box of smokes. “Liquorice. Got the taste of them on Voltemand
and it’s taken me an age to get some on the black market. Take one for now and one for later.”
Dorden took two, slid one behind his ear unlit and lit up the other from Corbec’s half-smoked stick.
They looked out into the night.
“It’s going to be rough,” remarked Corbec softly.
He was looking at the flash and howl of the storm, but Dorden knew what he meant.
“Yet you stayed.”
Corbec took a deep drag and white smoke plumed out of his hairy shadow. “I’m a sucker for good deeds.”
“Or lost causes.”
“The Emperor will provide. And aren’t we all just one big lost cause? The First and last and Lost? You don’t see
me giving up on that.”
Dorden smiled. The cigar was strong and the flavour hellish, but he was enjoying it. It had been twenty years since
he’d smoked. His wife had never approved, said it didn’t set a good example to the patients Dorden tended to. Then
the kids came along, Mikal and Clara, and he’d kicked the habit, so—
Dorden shut off the thoughts. Tanith had taken his wife with it, and Clara and her husband and their baby too. All
he had was Mikal, Trooper Mikal Dorden, vox-caster operator in Sergeant Hasker’s platoon.
“You’re thinking about home,” Corbec muttered.
Dorden broke his sad reverie. “What?”
“I know that look.”
“It’s dark, colonel!”
“I know that… feeling, then. The set of a man’s shoulders. Comes on us all, time to time.”
“I’d guess the commissar has told you to stamp it out where ever you see it? Bad for morale.”
“Not in my book. Tanith still lives while we all carry it here…” Corbec tapped his forehead. “And we don’t know
where we’re going if we don’t know where we came from.”
“Where are we going, do you suppose?”
Corbec flicked his butt onto the mud and let it sputter dead. “On a bad day, to hell. On a good day, I’d say we
were bound for that trophy world Gaunt’s promised us. Slaydo’s gift: the first world we truly win we can take and
claim and settle as our own.”
Dorden gazed at the storm. “New Tanith, huh? Tike the men talk of when they’re drunk or dying? Do you believe
that? Might we ever take a world ourselves, get the credit clean and true? We’re less than two thousand, livery
theatre we enter, we do so alongside other regiments, and that muddies victory claims and credit. I’m not a pessimist,
colonel, but I doubt any of us will ever find that New Tanith, except in drink or death.”
Corbec smiled, his white teeth shining in the gloom. “Then lucky me. One way or another, I’ll see more of it than
most.”
A door banged to their left. Chayker, shrouded in his cape, emerged from the hospital and carried a tin drum over
to the well. A few moments’ cranking, and he struggled with it back to the buildings. Dorden and Corbec could
already smell the broth Chayker and Foskin were brewing for all the company.
“Something smells good,” Corbec said.
“Toskin found tubers and grain in a field beyond the ditch walls, and we turned up dried pulses and salt meat in an
old pantry. Should be the best supper any of us have had in a while. But first rations go to any of the patients who can
take it.”
“Of course. They need it more than us. I’ve got a flask of sacra and a box of these smokes. Should keep me going
awhile.”
“Come in when you’re ready for proper nourishment,” Dorden instructed, as if issuing a prescription. “Thanks for
the cigars.” He headed back to the ward.
A circuit of the wounded took another hour and a half. Tesp and the other orderlies had done well, and many had
eaten or at least taken fluid. There were twelve who were too far gone to remain conscious, and Dorden carefully
rationed out his supply of drugs to prioritise them. The boy, Culcis, along with a few others, were now sitting up,
chatting, grateful. All of them, Volpone aristo-blood, were disdainful of the Tanith, but civil nevertheless. Being cut
adrift by their regiment, and spared from death only by a barbarian unit, would seem to have altered many of their
deeper prejudices and snobberies. For that at least, Dorden felt pleased.
He saw Trooper Caffran, coming in soaked from a patrol circuit, taking his bowl of broth to sit with Culcis. They
were about the same age, Dorden reckoned. The same age as Mikal. He heard them share a joke.
Lesp took his arm. One of the critical cases was showing signs of fading. With Chayker’s help, they carried the
man out into what had once been the household kitchen, and now served as a surgical theatre. A refectory table sat
there, long enough for a man, and they heaved him onto it.
The Blueblood, a Corporal Regara by his tags, had lost a leg below the knee and taken shrapnel in the chest. His
blood was far from blue. The refectory table became slick and blood drooled off onto the flagstones. Chayker almost
slipped and Dorden ordered him to fetch a mop and more wadding.
“There are no mops,” Chayker shrugged.
“Then find something like a mop.”
Dorden had to take off more of the ruined leg from the shrieking Regara with his handsaw before he could staunch
and tie the haemorrhage. He directed Tesp’s sure fingers in to suture the breach with fine, sail-maker’s stitches. By
then, Chayker had returned. Dorden found he was mopping the floor with shredded strips from his cape tied to an old
rake handle. For a Ghost to tear up his treasured stealth cloak to mop blood… Dorden’s admiration for his
volunteers’ devotion to duty grew.
They carried the softly moaning Regara back to his bed. With luck, and a fever-breaking shot of mascetamine, he
might yet live. But Dorden was called away almost at once to a seizure that Toskin couldn’t cope with, and then to a
man who had woken from near-coma, only to begin violently retching blood.
The ward fell quiet towards midnight, as other dramas came and passed. Dorden was scrubbing his chrome ribspreaders
in a bucket of scalding water when Mkoll came in, shaking the water from his cape. The storm was still
booming outside and thunder rattled the casements and roofing. Every now and then, loose glass in a window
somewhere fell in, or tiles slipped off and shattered. The storm had continued all that evening, but until then, Dorden
had blanked it out.
He watched Mkoll sit and clean his gun, the first thing he always did before seeing to other duties like food or
warmth. Dorden took him a bowl of broth.
“Anything out there?”
Mkoll shook his head. “If we’re lucky, the storm is slowing their advance.”
“And if we’re not?”
“They conjured the storm.”
Mkoll looked up at the rafters and the high roof. “This must have been quite a place. A good homestead, worth the
working. The soil is healthy and they had plenty of livestock.”
“A family home,” Dorden pondered, who hadn’t thought about it before. The thought of another home and family
lost to the war now bit at him. He felt weary again. Old.
Mkoll spooned his broth quietly. “There’s an old chapel at the rear of the house. Blown in, of course, but you can
still see the painted reredos commemorating the Emperor. The Volpone used it as a privy. Whoever lived here were
devout servants of the Imperium, working the land, raising their kin.”
“Until this.”
Dorden fell silent. Chaos had taken this world, Nacedon, two months gone, as part of their counter-punch to thwart
Macaroth’s crusade. It hadn’t been occupied, or even corrupted from within. Nacedon, an agricultural world with
three million Imperial colonists, had been violated and invaded in the space of three nights.
What kind of universe was it, Dorden wondered, where humans could struggle and break their backs and love
their families and worship the Emperor and build for years, only to lose it all in a few hours? His universe, he
concluded, the same one that had taken Tanith away.
A late moon was up, a lonely sentry in a sky suddenly clear of storm. The rain had stopped and silver clouds
scudded across the purple openness of the heaven.
Counterpart to the moon, a lone sentry stood at the gate of the station. Trooper Tremard, sitting his second shift at
the gate in the sandbag emplacement, watched the tree lines, black fuzzes of darkness edging the flats of the equally
black fields and fens. He was tired, and he wished that the fething Volpone had left their heavy gun in the
emplacement.
Mist rose across the fenland, drifting sideways like smoke. Something twinkled in the dark.
Tremard started up, grabbing his scope from the sandbags. He fumbled with the focus ring, pulling the green-ongreen
night vision view into true. Mist — and other things in it. The twinkle he had seen. Moonlight flashing back
from the staring reflective retina of hunting eyes.
He triggered his micro-bead link. “Gate to Ghosts! Can you hear me, colonel? To arms! To arms! Movement to the
south!”
Corbec rose abruptly from his cot, like a dead man lifting from a grave, making Dorden start. The colonel had been
catching forty winks on a spare bed in the ward as the medic sorted pills into paper twists. “What is it?”
Corbec was on his feet. “Three guesses, Doc.”
Dorden was up too. He looked around at the fragile hall, the vulnerable, half-dead men, as Corbec readied his
lasgun and voxed-in with the other troopers. Dorden felt suddenly stupid. He knew what a full-on assault of Chaos
was like. They’d all be shattered like an egg-shell. He’d been stupid to insist on staying. Now he had them all dead
— the Bluebloods, the Ghosts… valuable, peerless Ghosts like Corbec and Mkoll. He’d wasted them all, over some
foolish pride in an old oath. An old medical oath, taken in safer times, in a nice community practice where the worst
injury was a laceration at the sawmill.
Feth me for a fool! Feth me for my pride!
“We’ll front them as long as we can. The boys know some tricks,” Corbec told him. “I’ll need Chayker and
Foskin… Lesp can stay with you. If we lose the first attack, you need to be ready to get as many of the wounded out
into the back rooms. They’re ruins I know, but it’ll put more walls between you and the fighting.”
Dorden swallowed, thinking of the work it would take him and Lesp to carry sixty-seven men out into the rear of
the dwelling on stretchers. He heard the distant wail of las-fire and realised it wouldn’t be half the effort Corbec and
his soldiers were about to make. So he simply nodded, beckoning Lesp to him.
“Emperor be with you and watch over you, Colm Corbec,” he said. “And you, Doc.”
Tremard held the gate. Dark shapes moved across the fields and through the dim hedgerows towards him, crackling
out green pulses of laser fire and white-hot bolt rounds. The treacherous moon showed movement and the occasional
glint of armour, and he picked his targets well, barking orange slices of laser into the open fenland beyond the farm.
Ducking the incoming sprays of fire, a figure dropped into the position beside him. It was Colonel Corbec. Corbec
grinned at Tremard, made some obscene remark as to the maternal origins of the enemy that had Tremard cackling at
its vulgarity, and leaned up over the bags to loose a volley of shots from his lasgun down the lane into the fens.
Along the ditch walls, the other Ghosts opened up. Eight las guns against the encroaching dark, eight lasguns
picking their targets through scope and skill, matching the hundreds of fire-points blasting back at them from the fens.
“Where’s Brostin?” Corbec barked into his micro-bead, over the howl of gunplay, sustaining a regular firepattern.
A second later, his query was lost in a withering assault which blasted down the lane and onto his position. A
hundred or more warriors of Chaos were forcing their approach at the main gate, charging them, weapons blazing.
Corbec and Tremard could see nothing but the light-blur of their guns.
Corbec ducked under the intense volley. He didn’t even curse. It was over, he knew. The end of Colm Corbec. By
his side, Tremard, a second too late in ducking, flew backwards, his left arm gone in a shredded waste of flesh
below the shoulder, He fell on his back, screaming and writhing. His lasgun, with his left hand still holding the grip,
sat miraculously on the parapet where he had rested it.
Corbec scrambled to him, under the hideous rain of bolt and las-fire, grabbing the struggling man and holding him
close. He had to calm him and make him still before he could tie up that awful stump. If he lived that long.
Tremard screamed and screamed, fighting like a scalded cat, drenching Corbec and himself with the pumping
arterial spray of his stump. Corbec glanced up to see black forms in quilted armour, faces covered by gas-hoods,
scrambling over the lip of the sandbags towards him. He could smell their rank animal scent, and the badges of the
Dark Gods blazoned on their armour burned in his mind even at a glimpse and turned his stomach.
There was a double click, dry and solid, and then a whoosh of heat as the night lit up. Corbec winced. Trooper
Brostin stood over him, raking the tops of the sandbags and the lane beyond with his flamer. The hurricane force of
the flame gout cut the enemy away like dry grass.
“I was wondering where you’d got to,” Corbec said to Brostin. Then he tapped his micro-bead. “Medic! Medic!”
Dorden and Lesp were halfway through transporting the injured into the rear of the house when the call came through.
Stray shots were punching through the ward hall, exploding rafters and shattering wall-plaster and brick.
Dorden fumbled with his micro-bead, trying to steady the stretcher he was sharing with the backing Tesp.
“Dorden! What?”
“Tremard’s down bad. Get out here!” Any more of Corbec’s message was lost in crackling static, drowned by the
gunfire.
“Set it down! I’ll drag it,” Tesp cried to Dorden as a las-round punched a hole in the plaster near his head.
Dorden did so and Lesp hauled the stretcher through the archway, its wooden handles screeching on the floor,
“Just like a fish box back home!” Lesp yelled over the onslaught as he disappeared.
Dorden grabbed his kit. “Corbec! I’m coming out, but you need to send someone in to help Lesp move the
wounded!”
“Feth that! We’re all engaged out here! Can’t spare a man!”
“Don’t give me that!” Dorden returned, scuttling under the puncture level of the las-range as the hall fell apart
around him. “Lesp needs help! These men need help!”
A hand took his shoulder. He looked round. It was the Blueblood Culcis. Several more of the less seriously
injured Volpone were with him. “I can’t manage a stretcher with my leg, but I can man a fire-point, doctor. I’ll take
any lasgun free if it means able bodies can help you here!”
Dorden smiled at the young man’s bravery. Pain was slashed into the Blueblood’s thin face.
He nodded them forward to the door and they looked into the rain of fire.
“Caffran!” Dorden called on the link. “I’m sending a Blueblood over to you. Give him your weapon and then
return!”
He didn’t wait for an answer.
Using Chayker’s mop as a crutch, Culcis scurried out into the yard and made the inner wall, where Caffran was
blasting through a fire-slot. A nod, and Caffran gave up his gun and position to the Blueblood. Culcis settled in,
leaning against the flak-boards, and resumed blasting. Caffran ran back to the farmhouse door where Dorden was
waiting.
“Help Lesp! Go! Go!”
In three minutes, Dorden had substituted three more Volpones on the defence line, men with leg wounds or head
wounds, but able-bodied. In return, he got Claig, Gutes and Foskin.
Dorden told Foskin the drill, and Foskin supervised the five able-bodied Ghosts into a slick pattern of removing
the wounded into the rear sections of the house.
Shaken by the onslaught which lit up the feeble night Dorden reached the gatepost, running in a stoop. Brostin and
Corbec were blasting away. Brostin was now using Tremard’s lasgun, switching to the big flamer every time the
assault became too great.
Dorden knelt by Tremard, assessed his injury and set to work. “I need a stretcher for him!” Dorden yelled at
Corbec.
“Help him, Brostin,” Corbec snapped. As Dorden and Brostin carried Tremard back to the farmhouse, Corbec
held the gate. Dorden’s last view of him was clear: the huge Tanith warrior his hair loose and flowing in the night
wind as the storm came down again, crackling and flashing, flamer in one hand, lasgun in the other, dealing death to
anything that moved.
The enemy assault had pivoted to the western side of the horseshoe, and heavy fire slammed against the flakboarding,
throwing some sheets up out of the muck and shattering them Mkoll felt more than saw the change in
emphasis and rushed from his position at the east end to support Chayker and a Blueblood called Vengo who had
substituted for Gutes. Chaos soldiers were pushing through the holes in the outer flak-board wall and the three
Guardsmen, firing single, aimed shots to preserve power on Corbec’s orders, dropped dozens into the slime pit of
the ditch. Soon bodies blocked the fence holes as well as the missing boards had done.
Well enough when they come at us with boltguns and las-weapons, Mkoll thought to himself darkly. But what do
we do when they bring up flamers, meltas, grenades… or worse?
The cacophony of the assault was ear-splitting and a double echo rolled back to them from the wide fens like
thunder, almost as loud as the real thing. The storm or the storming shook the earth, and Mkoll wasn’t sure which.
Vengo, bandaged up with a gut wound, found his strength failing and his vision swimming. The majesty and fury of
the open assault, the desperation and the frantic effort, had quite numbed him to the dull pain of his injuries, but they
were telling on him none the less. Drenched by the downpour, he tried to reposition himself, changing spent clip for
fresh with cold, wet hands. The fresh power clip slipped away and dropped into the mud under his feet. He stooped.
A soldier of Chaos, cut down and presumed dead in the ditch, had crawled forward, and now loomed over the
inner fence above the scrabbling Volpone. His chest had been blasted open, and blood and tissue dribbled from
exposed ribs. His gas-hood was also gone, revealing the fanged snout and grey hide of his corrupted face. He swung
up a rusty entrenching tool. Chayker, dazzled by the volleys of las-light and the strobe effect of the lightning, saw his
assailant in a flash of white, frozen mid-swing. He wrenched his lasgun out of the fire-slot and blasted down the
gully, blowing the attacker out over the fence. Rising with the recovered clip, deafened by the sensory overload of
the storm and fighting, Vengo had no idea how he had been spared or how close he had been to death.
Bolt rounds drummed into the flak-boards around Mkoll’s slot, and nailed wooden splinters into his cheek and
neck. He cried out and dropped back for a second. Rubbing at the bloody grazes in his face, he moved back to the
slot, re-aiming. Other dark shapes were stirring in the filth at the bottom of the ditch. Vengo’s close call had been a
warning. Even killing shots didn’t seem to finish all of these abominations. Many of those that they had cut down
were far from dead, and now were crawling and clambering up to attack the inner fence.
“Brace!” he yelled over the comm-link to Chayker and Vengo. He had a few tube-charges left, and he hefted three
over the inner fence into the ditch with its half-seen stirrings.
The triple blast rocked them and pelted the inner flak-boards with liquid mud and liquefied organics.
“Keep checking the ditch!” Mkoll voxed. “They don’t die easy.”
Vengo caught the hint at once, and lowered his aim to pick off two more of the supposed dead who were writhing
through the mire towards him. Others clustered around the breaches in the outer fence, cut down by the trap as fast as
they gathered and pressed in.
How many of them are there out there? Chayker wondered. The force of the assault seemed to be increasing with
every moment.
On the eastern turn of the horseshoe, Culcis held the line with his other two Volpone substitutes, Drado and
Speers. Brostin had returned from his stretcher run to the house and fell in beside Culcis, hefting a misfiring Volpone
heavy stubber he’d found leaning against the wall in the long hall. It had a drum of sixty rounds left in it, and he’d
resolved to use them all before switching to his laspistol. His flamer was in Corbec’s meaty hands at the gate. All
they could hear or see from the gate area, at the southern point of the horseshoe, were belches of flame and laschatter
and Corbec’s increasingly colourful exclamations over the vox-link.
Brostin settled in, getting to know the unfamiliar stubber. Its cyclic rate was poor and it jammed frequently, but
when it fired, the thump and blast was satisfying. Me shredded half a dozen shapes that loomed beyond the outer
fence. At the eastern side, the tree-line and woods were closer than at the west, which looked out over fenland
interrupted only by hedges and dykes. Here, the enemy was on them with little warning, rushing out of the trees to
assault the double fence and the ditch.
Brostin found himself admiring the shooting skills of the Blueblood Culcis. Arrogantly, against Corbec’s orders,
he had adjusted the power setting to full and was firing off searing orange blasts. But each one counted.
His eye’s as good as Mad Larkin’s, thought the heavy-set Ghost, and that’s a real compliment.
Drado and Speers were doing their part too, but Drado’s aim was off. Though able-bodied, the man had a head
wound and one eye bandaged. The lack of binocular range-finding was ruining his shot. Brostin hunkered down and
moved along the fence to him.
“Aim left!” he yelled over the barrage and the thunder. “You’re shooting wide!”
Drado turned on him, his noble, half-bandaged face curled into a haughty sneer. “No low-life gutter-dog tells a
Volpone how to fight!”
Brostin smacked him hard with the side of his fist and slammed the Blueblood into the mud.
“Get up!” Brostin said fiercely, fist raised. “This is a last stand of the Tanith First-and-Only. We’re only here
because of you and your kinsmen! Tight like a Ghost or stand aside and let someone else do it!”
Drado hauled himself up and spat at Brostin. “You’ll pay…” he began.
Firing his stubber out at the enemy, Brostin laughed. “Pay? Of course I’ll pay! But not to you! If we live through
this, my Blueblood friend, you can hammer me to hell, and get your oh-so-noble brothers to help! See me care! If we
don’t die here, tonight, guarding the line to protect your precious wounded, then I’ll go laughing into any retribution
you care to dish out! What could be worse than this?”
Drado didn’t answer. He set to firing again, and Brostin noted with approval that he was compensating now and
favouring the left side. He made hits.
“Much better, you feth-wit,” he muttered.
Inside rut manor house, Dorden checked the state of the wounded they had moved. With the help of Tesp, Gutes,
Caffran, Toskin and Claig, he had transferred the patients back, one at a time, through to the rear chambers and then
down in the long undercroft. This low, vaulted cellar space was made of thick stone. The best protection they could
afford. They might survive the attack here — or be buried like rats.
With Foskin’s help, he treated Tremard’s wound and got him stable. Then he ordered all the Ghosts back out to the
defence, all except Tesp, whom he needed. Another comatose Volpone had woken during the rough relocation and
was convulsing.
Caffran, Toskin, Gutes and Claig made their way up the cellar steps, taking their pick of the broken Volpone
weapons stacked in the stable-block on their way to rejoin the defence.
The convulsing Volpone died. Though he showed no outward signs of injuring except severe bruising, Dorden
knew his innards had been turned to jelly by artillery concussion. Lesp helped him haul the corpse back up the
undercroft stairs and dump it in the hall.
They went back down. The undercroft was damp and pun gent, lit by hissing chemical lamps the Ghosts had set up
hurriedly. The injured moaned and sighed. Some slept like they were dead. The earth around them all shook and
trickles of liquid mud spurted down from the roof every now and then as the onslaught rattled the foundations of the
house.
“We’re all going to die here, aren’t we, sir?” Lesp asked, his voice clear and certain.
Dorden stammered for a moment, lost for words. He thought, desperately, what Gaunt might say in such
circumstances. What would a trained political officer do here, trying to raise the spirits of men looking death in he
face? He couldn’t do it. It wasn’t in him. He couldn’t compose any deft line about “the greater good of the Imperial
Guard” or the “lifeblood of the Emperor”. Instead, all he could manage was something entirely personal.
“I’m not,” he told Lesp. “When I die, my wife and daughter and granddaughter die too, their memories lost with
me. For them, I’ll not die here, Tesp.”
Tesp nodded, his big Adam’s apple gulping in his narrow throat, He thought of the memories he carried: mother,
father, brothers, crew mates on the archipelago trawler.
“Neither will I, then,” he managed.
Dorden turned towards the stairs.
“Where are you going?” Tesp asked.
“You manage things here. I’m going to take a look up top. From the sound of things, they may need a medic.”
Tesp pulled out his laspistol and offered it, butt-first, to the chief medic.
Dorden shook his head. “I can’t start that now,” he said.
Upstairs, the old ruin was quiet. It seemed as if the storm and the assault had abated together for the moment. Dorden
edged into the vacated long hall and tried his micro-bead but it was dead. The ceiling lamps swung and loose debris
fluttered down. Tree of bodies, the stinking cots looked pitiful and sadly spoiled. Dorden stepped over pools of
blood and shreds of discarded clothing.
He strode into the outer kitchen, looking once at the stained table where he had excised a part of Regara’s leg. He
saw the old fireplace for the first time. Black iron, just like the one he had sat before at home on Tanith. He and his
wife, at the end of a long night, with a book and a glass of something warming, before the grate-light.
Along the mantle, small blocks of what looked like chalk sat in a row. He moved over and took one in his hand. A
tusk. The small, shed tusk of a pig. The inhabitants of this manor, whoever they were, had raised swine, cared for
them enough to treasure the trophies of their growth and development. Pig teeth, each marked in a delicate hand with
a name… Emperor, Sire, His lordship… and dates.
This touch of frugal humanity, the day-to-day chronicle of a farmstead, affected him deeply. It wasn’t mawkish, it
mattered somehow. Why pigs? Who had lived here, raised the swine, toiled in the fens, brought up a family?
A sound from the long hall brought him up to the surface of his thoughts. He moved back to meet a gaggle of men
as they limped and blundered in through the hall doors from the outside. The Volpone substitutes and the Ghosts, all
except Corbec. They were shell-shocked and dazed, weary on their feet.
Dorden found Mkoll at the rear of the group.
“They’ve fallen back,” Mkoll said. “It’s dead quiet out there. That can mean only one thing…”
“I’m a medic, not a soldier, Mkoll! What does it mean?”
Mkoll sighed as Dorden attended to the splinter wounds in his face. They’ve failed with a physical assault.
“They’re drawing back so they can bring up artillery.”
Dorden nodded. “Get below, into the undercroft, all of you. Foskin — Lesp will help you cook up some food for
all. Do it! Artillery or not, I want everyone sustained.”
The men filed away towards the steps into the cellar. Dorden was alone again in the hall.
Corbec entered, covered in blood and fire-soot. He dropped Brostin’s empty flamer onto one cot and threw
Tamard’s spent lasgun the other way.
“Time’s trickling away, Doc,” he said. “We held them — feth but we held them!—but they’re gonna hammer us
now. I scoped movement over the fens, big guns being wheeled into place. An hour, if we’re lucky, and then they’ll
level us from a distance.”
“Colm… I thank you for all you and the men have done tonight. I hope it was worth it.”
“It’s always worth it, Doc.”
“So what do we do now? Bury ourselves in the cellar?”
Corbec shrugged. “That won’t save us from their shells. Don’t know about you, but I’m going to do the only thing I
can think of at a time like this?”
“Which is?”
“Pray to the Emperor. Mkoll said there was an old shrine out back of this place. Prayers are all we have left.”
Together, Corbec and Dorden pulled their way through a litter of rubble and debris and broken furniture into the little
room at the back of the farmhouse. It had lost its roof and the stars twinkled above them.
Corbec had brought a lamp. He played its light over the rear walls, picking up the flaking painted image on the
ornamental screen Mkoll had mentioned. It showed the Divine Emperor subduing the Heretics, and smaller figures of
a man, a woman, and three small children, shown in obeisance to the central figure of the God-emperor of Man.
“There’s an inscription here,” Dorden said, scraping the dirt away from the wall with his cuff pulled up over the
ball of his hand.
“A pig! What is this?”
Corbec raised the lamp and read off the inscription. “Here’s irony for you, Doc: this was a trophy world. A New
Tanith. The master of this hall was a Parens Cloker, of the Imperial Guard, Hogskull Regiment. The Hogskulls won
this world during the first advance into the Sabbat one hundred and ninety years ago Winning it, they were awarded
settlement rights. Cloker was a corporal in the Guard, and he took his rights gladly. Settled here, made a family,
raised swine in honour of the mascot beast of his old regiment. His kin have honoured that ever since.”
Corbec faltered, something like sadness in his eyes. “Feth! To get there, to win it, to take the trophy world… and
still it comes down to this?”
“Not for all. How many trophy worlds are there out there where the soldiers of the Guard have retired and lived
out their days?”
“I don’t know. This is all too real. To fight for your lifetime, get the prize you wanted, and then this?”
Corbec and Dorden sank down together in the debris-strewn chapel.
“You asked me why I stayed with you, Doc. I’ll tell you now as we’re dead and we have nothing to live for.” With
that last remark, Corbec flung his hand towards the reredos’ inscription.
“Well?”
“You were the doctor for Pryze County for twenty years.”
“Twenty-seven. And Beldane.”
Corbec nodded. “I was raised in Pryze. My family were wood workers there. I was born out of wedlock and so I
took my father’s name, when I knew him. My mother now… I was a difficult birth.”
Dorden stiffened, knowing somehow what must come next.
“She’d have died in labour, had it not been for the young medic who charged out in the night and saw to her. Landa
Meroc. Remember her?”
“She would have died if I hadn’t—”
“Thank you, Doctor Dorden.”
Dorden looked round at Corbec in wonder. “I delivered you? Feth! Fething feth! Am I that old?!”
They laughed together until they were choking. And until the thump of artillery began, blasting the quiet of the night
away.
The Imperial Guard drove the enemy back with their shelling and Gaunt was on the foremost half-track as they
ploughed back into the fenlands in the early light of dawn. They caught the enemy almost unawares, and were
blasting the Chaos artillery and infantry even as the enemy wheeled their own blasphemous guns around into position
in the dark.
The farmhouse, and its shattered defence of horseshoe fences, was almost unrecognisable. Mud, burnt flak-board
and shattered corpses lay piled amidst the devastated ruins. He ordered the vehicle to stop, and it spun wheels on the
fenland muck as it slid to a halt.
Trooper Lesp was on duty at the gateway. He saluted the colonel-commissar as he passed in. Dorden and Corbec
were waiting for him in the littered yard.
“Medical evac is coming,” Gaunt told them. “We’ll get the Volpone wounded out of here.”
“And our own too?” Dorden asked, thinking of Tremard, and Mkoll’s lacerated face.
“All of the wounded. So, you’ve had an adventure out here, it seems?”
“Nothing to speak of, sir,” Corbec said.
Gaunt nodded and moved off into the manor house ruin.
Corbec turned to Dorden and showed him the pig’s tooth he had clutched in his hand. “I won’t forget this,” he said.
“It may not have worked here on Nacedon for this guardsman, but by this tooth, I’ll trust it will work for us Ghosts. A
trophy world, brighter and better than you can imagine.”
Dorden’s hand held a pig-tooth too, marked “The Emperor”.
“I trust you to do that, Colm. Do it. Doctor’s orders.”
Swing, address, stab, return… swing, address, stab, return…
In the shade of the cycads at the edge of the Tanith encampment on Monthax, Trooper Caffran was practising
bayonet discipline. Stripped to the waist, his powerful young shoulders glistening with sweat, he whirled his lasgun
in time to his rhythmic chant, snapping it round, clutching it horizontally, lunging forward and killing the bole of one
of the trees over and again. After each strike, he tugged it free with effort, and repeated the drill. The trunk was
slashed and puckered, oozing orange sap from the wounds left by his nimble work.
“Good skill,” Gaunt said from behind him. Caffran snapped around, realising he was being watched. He shook
sweat from his brow and began a salute.
“At ease,” Gaunt said. “I’m just walking the lines. Everything alright with you? The men in your platoon?”
Caffran felt tongue-tied, as he always did when Gaunt addressed him directly. He still, after all this time, had
mixed feelings about the commissar who had both saved them and made them Ghosts in the same action.
“We’re all waiting for the word,” he said at last. “Itching for action. This waiting…”
“It’s the worst part, I know.” Gaunt sat down on a nearby log. “Until the killing starts and you realise the waiting
wasn’t all that bad after all.”
Caffran caught the smile in Gaunt’s eyes and grinned as well, unable to stop himself.
Gaunt was pleased. He was very aware of the stiffness Caffran always manifested around him. A good soldier,
one of the youngest, but so very nearly one of Rawne’s malcontents.
“Go again,” Gaunt suggested.
Self-consciously, Caffran turned and repeated his drill. Swing, address, stab, return… It took a moment to pull his
blade free from the thick bark.
“Slide it,” Gaunt said. “It’ll come out easier if you slide it laterally before pulling.”
Caffran did so. It was true.
Gaunt got up, moving on with his circuit. “Not long now, Caffran,” Gaunt said as he moved away.
Caffran sighed. No, not long. Not long before the frenzy and the madness would start.
Swing, address, stab, slide, return… Swing, address, stab, slide, return…
NINE
A SIMPLE PLAN
Engines screaming, the imperial troop carriers fell upon the ocean world, Sapiencia.
Like swarms of fat, black beetles shrilling in over the edges of a pond, they assaulted the Bay of Belano. Their
combined down-draughts boiled the choppy surface water into foam mist, an embankment of steam three kilometres
long and two hundred metres high that stormed forward across the beach rocks and blinded the island’s outer
defences.
It entirely hid the merciless wall of solid water driven up under the spray by the concussive force, and this tidal
wave exploded across the western sea-fall emplacements of Oskray Island twenty seconds after the steam cloud
choked them. Rock and metal and flesh were pulverised, blasted into the air, then sucked back into the basin of the
bay as pressures equalised and hydraulic action righted itself. A spume haze hung over the island, clogging the
beaches and masking the final, slow approach of the gargantuan troop-ships.
The heavy emplacements higher on the cliffs of Oskray spat fierce salvos down into the mist, or up into the
striated clouds where further formations of troop-ships were beginning their final approaches to the island shore.
The fire from the batteries, blue and flickering, danced like luminous damsel flies amongst the beetle-like ships.
Some craft burst as they were touched, and burned; some dropped, bleeding smoke and trailing lines of debris.
The twenty kilometres of Oskray Island was only partly rock. It was, in point of fact, a cluster of islets, linked as
one by the massive industrial fortification built up upon the shoulders of submarine mountains. Behind oceanblocking
walls of stone a hundred metres thick, pump structures, drill towers, flame-belching waste stacks and
pylons rose against the sky. The primary target, the great refinery hive of Oskray Island One.
Red hazard lights flashed and hooters started their deafening caterwaul as the jaw-hatch locks of troop-ship
Lambda disengaged with a massive leaden thump. Dim light began to pour in from outside as the jaw-sections
hinged open. Caffran, tensed tight and ready, knew they were assaulting a sea-bound target, and that the way in for
the infantry was up the beach That was the plan. But as the troop-hatch opened, he believed for a moment they had
come in too low and it was translucent torrents of water that were spurting into the dispersal deck. He gulped in his
breath, held it, but it was only steam and pale light that rushed over him.
The yells of men, of boots racing on metal decking, and of the hooters, were overwhelming. With fifty others,
lasguns raised, he charged out of the hatch mouth, for a second, on the ramp, the dispersal deck noises were
swamped by the greater volume of the thundering drop-ships all around. Caffran could see nothing beyond the men
closest to him and the solid atmosphere of mist and smoke. He could smell salt and ozone, oil and thermite.
Then nothing. Rushing silence, roaring dullness, a coldness all over him, enveloping him, dark grey blurs in his
eyes.
He was underwater, floundering in the chilly, muffled dark of the sea, writhing black bodies struggling and flailing
around him, each one bejewelled with trapped baubles of silver air.
The troop-ship had come up short of the beach slope, and all the men dropping blind off the ramp were falling into
thirty metres of ocean where the island shelved steeply away.
Caffran couldn’t swim. He’d been born and raised in a forest a thousand kilometres from any open water. He’d
never seen the ocean, any ocean, though he’d heard others, like the medic-fisherman Lesp, speak of it. He was going
to do the last thing he had ever expected to do: drown.
Momentarily, he realised he had not yet released the deep breath he had instinctively sealed into his lungs when he
thought the dispersal deck was going to flood, and he almost laughed, almost releasing the air.
Instead, he held on to it, felt it burning and exhausting inside him as he rose slowly to what seemed the surface. It
saved his life, where others had gone screaming and exhaling off the ramp.
Sinking, blundering, black shapes thrashed around him: Tanith combat dress, dark as dry blood, faces pale like
phantoms or ghouls. A body sank beside him, arms frozen in claws, mouth open to emit a dribble of bubbles, eyes
glazed. Caffran kicked upwards again.
Something struck him stunningly hard on the back of the neck and he lost his precious saved breath in a blurt of
silvery air pebbles. Men were still coming off the ramp-end above, falling on those Ghosts now coming up from
below. A boot had hit him. The man it belonged to was inverted in the water behind him, panicking, dying. Caffran
kicked away, trying to rise and not breathe in to ease his emptied, screaming lungs. He saw men explode into the
grey, dreamy world from above, fighting the water as they hit and sank. But that at least told him the surface was only
a few metres away.
The man who had kicked him on his way down had become entangled with another by the slings of their lasguns.
One of them fired his lasgun in desperation, twice, three times. The water boiled around each slicing minnow of
orange light. Caffran’s ears throbbed as they heard the fizzing report of the underwater shots. One of the las-rounds
punctured a drifting corpse nearby; another punched through the leg of a desperate swimmer next to Caffran. Blood
fogged the water. Caffran heard the distant voices of his ancestors in his ears, muffled by pressure and fluid and
distance and time.
He surfaced in a gasping explosion, retching, treading water, blood streaming from his nose. He looked around to
see Ghosts surfacing all around, kicking towards the shore or just panicking. Some were floating in the surge,
lifeless, already lost. Noise rushed back to him, the momentous noise of combat now unfiltered by the deadness of
the sea. Screaming, the whicker of lasguns, the roar of troop-ship downwash. He could smell blood, water and
smoke, but was thankful, because that meant he was breathing. Behind him, las-rounds punched up out of the water
into the fog as other unfortunates lost their grip on everything but their triggers as they drowned.
Caffran paddled forward, hacking up each and every slop of sea-water he accidentally swallowed. The pall of
smoke and fog cut visibility at the surface to ten metres. For a moment, he heard the voices of his ancestors again —
then realised that wasn’t what he’d heard at all. It was his micro-bead intercom, crackling with staccato traffic,
screeching into his ear-plug. Underwater, it had been the tinny whisper of ghosts.
Caffran felt gravel or sand under his boots, a slope. He felt weight and momentum return to him as he churned up
through shallower and still shallower water, falling twice and choking. Bolt rounds and las-fire whipped and
stitched the breakers around him, cutting down the Ghost beaching next to him. The man fell face-down, his body
lifted and pulled back, lifted and pulled back again by the choppy waves.
Caffran fell again as a las-round scorched across the top of his left shoulder, dropping him to his knees. His shins
scraped on the stony gravel, shredding his fatigue pants from the knee down. He felt his lasgun grow heavier and flop
away. The shot had cut his gun-strap across the shoulder.
Hands pulled him up as he grabbed hold of his weapon.
“Caffran!”
It was Domor, the squad’s sweeper. He was laden down with the heavy backpack of the sweeper unit and its long
handled sensor-broom. Domor had lost his eyes — and almost his life — in that final push on Menazoid Epsilon six
months before. They had been there together for that fatal time, in the thick of it as they were here. Domor’s metalirised
artificial implants shuttered and whined as they adjusted to look down at Caffran. The sweeper’s cybernetic
implants looked like truncated binocular scopes crudely sutured into the scar tissue of his eye-sockets.
“We can make the beach!” Domor yelled, pulling the young trooper to his feet. They ran, blundering through the
breakers. Others charged or staggered in with them, a ragged line of Ghosts making landfall on the fog-washed shore,
some falling over submerged barricade crosses or entangling themselves on rolls of rusting razor-wire. The firestorm
fell amongst them and some dropped silently, or screaming, or in minced pieces.
Now, the flinty shingle slope of the beach. They crashed up it, pebbles flying from each footfall. Twenty metres up,
they ducked below the lichen-fronded line of an old wooden groyne, black as tar. Las-fire slammed into its weighty
bulk.
“What’s the plan? What have we got?” Caffran yelled.
“Nothing! Visibility is low! Heavy resistance from up there!” Domor pointed up into the spray-fog at something
only his augmented vision could resolve, and then only barely.
Two more bodies flung themselves down next to them, then a third. Trooper Mkendrik with his flamer; Trooper
Chilam, missing an ear and yowling like a cat as he dabbed his salty hand at the bloody hunk of cartilage on the side
of his head. And then, Sergeant Varl.
Varl was a popular officer amongst the Ghosts; young, field-promoted from the rank of trooper, a wise-cracking,
hard-nosed bastard refreshingly lacking all the airs and graces of the officer class. He’d lost his shoulder on Fortis
Binary, and his black tunic bulged over the cybernetic joint the medics had given him. It was clear to Caffran that the
sergeant was in some pain. Varl cursed and struggled with his artificial shoulder.
Sea-water had soaked into the shoulder joint, shorting out servos and fusing linkages. His arm was dead and
useless, but still the raw neural connections transmitted flickers of shorting electrical failure to his brain. Domor had
been lucky. His ocular units had been sealed into his skull enough to prevent such damage… though Caffran
wondered how long it would take the insidious touch of seawater corrosion to blind the man.
With Mkendrik’s help, Caffran stripped off Varl’s tunic and unscrewed the bolts on the small inspection plate in
Varl’s metal shoulder blade. With the point of his Tanith dagger, Mkendrik prised out the flat battery cells revealed
there, cutting the electrical relay which governed the limb. Varl sighed as his arm went dead and Caffran strapped it
up, tight against the sergeant’s body. It was a desperate gesture. Without the booster relay of the cells, not only all
neural control, but all life support would be cut from the organic parts of Varl’s repaired arm. He needed proper
help, or within an hour or two his now-lifeless arm would begin to decay and perish.
For now, though, the sergeant was grateful, he scrambled over, supporting himself on his one good hand, and took
a look over the cover-line. Along the beach, under the downpour of fire, men were coming ashore. Most were dying;
some were making it to cover.
“Where in Feth’s name is the armour?” Varl wailed. “They should have led the assault and opened this beach up!”
Caffran scoped around, and saw heavy Basilisk tanks half-submerged, struggling up the beach a hundred metres
away. They were in too deep, drowning like beached whales, squirming and coughing exhaust smoke as their engines
flooded and died.
“The troop-ships dropped us short,” he said to Varl.
Varl looked where Caffran pointed. “They’ve drowned the front end of this fething assault!” he bellowed.
“They were blind… This spray—” Caffran began.
“Feth them for not doing their job!” Varl spat.
A whinnying bolt round ricocheted off the top of the groyne’s solid woodwork and took Chilam straight in the
face, exploding his head. He flew back onto the shingle, full length.
“We have to advance! We have to!” Varl yelled. Micro-bead chatter, discordant and contradictory, rasped in their
ears.
“There’s no going forward,” Domor said quietly.
The spume of the spray-mist was receding, and now they could see what he saw. The vast white curtain wall of
Oskray Island’s sea-defences rose ahead of them, almost a kilometre high. Apart from some stray scorch marks, it
was unblemished. The Basilisks had been meant to flatten it and break through for the infantry. But the wall still
stood, impassive, cold, like a denial of any possible future.
Varl cursed.
Caffran heard the protesting wail first. He looked back out to sea, then grabbed Domor and Varl and threw them
flat into the painful jumble of the shingle. Mkendrik dived down too.
A troop-ship, one of the great fat beetles, on fire from end to end, was coming in low, half-sidelong, nose down,
spilling burning fuel and shreds of fuselage. It was huge, blocking out the sky, six hundred tonnes of dying metal
keening in towards the beach over their heads. Its jaw-hatches were still closed.
Men are cooking in there, Caffran thought, wondering which regiment, and then, as it came down on top of his
head, his thoughts guttered out like a candle flame in a hurricane.
Mkendrik shook him awake. Caffran stirred, and woke up into the roar of the assault. “How long have I been out?”
“Less than a minute,” Mkendrik said.
Caffran struggled up out of the shingle. It had felt like hours, like all his fatigue and pain had overwhelmed him
and sent him to sleep. “What happened?” he gasped. “I thought for Feth we were dead then.”
Mkendrik pointed. At first there was little to see. The white steam and mist had become fouled with black smoke,
and the ashy curls of it, thick with glowing cinders, enveloped the beach. Then, Caffran made out more. The stricken
troop-ship had slammed over them, coming to rest at the head of the beach where the last few seconds of its crashflight
had been broken by the fortified seawall of Oskray Island. The impact had blown the wall in. For six hundred
metres, its immeasurably old and solid stone was fused and fractured. A blackened chasm had opened into the heart
of the refinery. The men aboard that troop-ship had brought a way into the target with their lives as surely as if they
had fought their way up the beach.
Caffran gathered scattered items which had split from his burst pack, and recovered his fallen lasgun. Mkendrik
was changing las-cells. A short way off, Varl and Domor were making ready, and small groups of Ghosts in foxholes
along the beach were also preparing to make use of this new way in.
Enemy fire still strafed down from the wall, though it was thinner now such a chunk of the wall had gone. The
incoming troop-ships, still roaring and settling over the tide-line behind them, were jockeying into this blind spot to
avoid the tracking fire from the main batteries on the cliffs. Caffran heard thunder, and turned to see four Basilisks
hoving up the beach, properly delivered, moving past them into the breach and tracking to fire. They sizzled up wet
stone flecks as they rolled, cranking their huge, decorated bulks up and over the groynes. Caffran recognised the
markings. Ketzoks, the 17th Armoured Regiment, the so-called Serpents who had been gulled into slaughtering them
back on Voltemand.
With Varl, Domor, Mkendrik and several others, Caffran moved in towards the breach, running over stone litter
and smouldering fragments of blackened mechanicals, the last remnants of the troop-ship. Stray las-shots winged
down at them and stubber rounds rattled with a curious clack-clack sound off the stone facings to their left.
Entering the chasm in the wall, Caffran passed into deep shadow. Ahead, one hundred metres down the V-shaped
channel blasted by the crash, a dimness loomed. He felt a sense of pride. They would be the first — the Ghosts
would be the first to break through the stalwart defences of the target.
He was close to the far end now, stumbling with the others through the shadow, picking his way around mangled
hull fragments. Ahead, the dimness was becoming a forest of steel and iron. The refinery itself.
Gaunt had been precise in his briefing. The fleet could have vaporised Oskray Island from orbit, but it was too
valuable. That meant a land assault to retake it from the legions of Chaos. The vile host here called themselves the
Kith, some hive-fermented sub-cult of Khorne… Caffran had blanked on some of the briefing’s complexities, partly
because it was alien gibberish to him, and partly because the gibberish made him feel ill. He didn’t want to listen to
the details concerning the filth they were going up against. The Kith: that was all he focussed on. The Kith were the
sub-human vermin he was here to eradicate. Their leader was a monster called Sholen Skara. Fragments of the
Chaos armada stopped at Balhaut had run to Sapiencia for shelter, and their leaders had conjoined with a Chaos cult
already thriving in the underclass of the vast hive to overthrow Imperial rule and seize the fuel-oil and promethium
wells.
Colonel-Commissar Gaunt had spoken long and passionately about the Kith in his briefing. Caffran knew Gaunt
had been part of the great Balhaut victory, back when he was still a political officer with the Hyrkan Eighth. Gaunt
loathed all Chaos, but loathed especially the tendrils of it which had escaped destruction at Balhaut only to twist and
pollute other worlds, thanks, as he saw it, to the tactical miscalculations of Warmaster Macaroth. Gaunt had spoken
of Sholen Skara, renegade of the Balhaut murder-camps, as if he had known him personally. That was why the
colonel-commissar had volunteered his Ghosts for the Oskray assault. He had made it plain to them all.
And that, mused Caffran, was why they had been drowned and blasted and torn apart on the razor-wire.
Caffran often thought about Gaunt. Ibram Gaunt. He rolled the name in his mind, a name he would never dare
voice aloud. The colonel, the commissar. A strange man, and Caffran’s feelings for him were strange too. He was the
best, most caring, most charismatic leader Caffran could imagine. Caffran had seen, time and again, the way Gaunt
looked after the Ghosts. Caffran had also seen enough of other regiments and their commanders and politicos to
know how rare a thing that was. Many, like beloved Colonel Corbec, regarded Gaunt as a saviour, a friend, a
brother, and Caffran could not deny he admired Gaunt and would follow him to the ends of any earth.
But Caffran knew Feygor, Rawne and the other malcontents well, and in bitter moments he shared their contempt
for the colonel-commissar. For all his fatherly love, like their own private Emperor, Gaunt had left Tanith to die.
Prom time to time, Caffran had been tempted to throw aside his reservations about Gaunt and worship him as so
many others did. But always, that creeping resentment in his heart had stopped him from total devotion. Gaunt was
ruthless, calculating, direct. He would never stint from sending men to their deaths, for his duty was to the Emperor
and the rule of Terra long before it was to the lost souls of Tanith.
Caffran saw the boy Milo, the so-called adjutant, as a constant reminder of the lost youth of his homeworld. Milo
was only a year or two younger than Caffran, but a gulf divided them. He never spoke to the boy. Gaunt, in his oh-so
generous wisdom, had saved Milo from the fires of Tanith Magna. Saved one — but no one else.
Caffran thought, at such times, of Laria. How he had loved her. How very much. All Caffran knew for sure was
that Laria was dead now. How she had died he had no idea, and frankly, he was thankful for that. But Laria haunted
him. Laria embodied everything he had lost. Tanith itself, his friends, his life, his family. For Laria’s sake, Caffran
knew he would always remain one of those Ghosts in the middle way, one who would follow Gaunt to hell devoutly,
but would never forgive him when they arrived.
Here, in the wall gully of Oskray, it was easy to hate Gaunt. The stink of death and fire filled the place. Caffran
slid in low against a fallen tower of stone blocks as he approached the opening into the island proper. Varl,
Mkendrik and Trooper Vulliam dropped in beside him.
Behind them, down the crash-chasm at the mouth of the breach, Caffran could hear shouts and grinding tracks.
He looked at Varl questioningly.
“The fething Basilisks!” the sergeant said. “They want to storm in ahead of the infantry, but they can’t get their fat
arses into the gap.”
“Then we still have point,” Caffran smiled. “Feth the armour!”
Varl chortled. “Feth them indeed. Did us no favours on Voltemand, doing us no favours now.”
Varl signalled the advance beyond the breach gap, and fifty-nine Ghosts rose from cover and moved forward.
Vulliam, two metres ahead of Caffran, was one of the first to break into the open. Stub rounds broke him messily into
four.
Six more Ghosts died as they broke cover. Though hammered, the Kith had their side of the chasm in the wall
soundly covered. Caffran fell back with the others as las-rounds and bolts and stub charges peppered the exit of the
breach.
In cover, they lay trembling as the deadly rain continued to drum the opening ahead.
“Blocked as surely as we were before,” Domor said, scratching at his eye-sutures.
“You all right?” Mkendrik asked.
“Vision’s a little foggy. Got water in there. Hope…” Domor said no more, but Caffran knew what he was thinking.
The seawater had ruined Varl’s arm, and now it seemed to be starling its slow work on Domor’s eyes.
“Might as well have left this fething wall standing for all tin-good it’s going to do us!” Trooper Callun said.
Varl nodded, nursing his strapped arm. His laspistol, the only weapon he could handle now, lay in his lap.
“What about missiles? Munitions?” Mkendrik wondered. “We could blow them out and—”
“What do we aim at?” Varl asked sourly. “Do you even see them?”
Mkendrik settled back with no answer. Ahead of them was nothing but a sliced mouth cut in the wall. Beyond, the
steeple girders and scaffolds of the refinery, thirty storeys high. The enemy gunners could be anywhere.
Silence fell. Sand flies billowed around the dead, and oceanic carrion swooped in to peck at the cindered flesh
with hooked, pink beaks. The birds mobbed the chasm, squawking and shrilling. Trooper Tokar drove them off with
a scatter burst of las-fire.
There was movement and voices behind them. Caffran and the others turned to see several Ketzok gunnery
troopers creeping their way, pausing to exchange words with each group of Ghosts.
One hurried over to them, bent double, and saluted Varl’s sergeant patch as he crouched next to them.
“Corporal Fuega, Ketzok 17th Serpents.”
“Varl, sergeant, Ghost. And your purpose is?”
Fuega scratched his ear for a moment, unmanned by Varl’s attitude. “Our Basilisks can’t manage this breach, so
we’re going to split it wider with shelling. My commander asks you to fall back out of the fire-zone.”
“Wish he’d given us such a warning on Voltemand,” Domor said icily.
Fuega stepped back. “That black day is forever in our shame, Tanith. If we could give anything, even our lives, to
change it, we would.”
“I’m sure you would,” Varl sneered. He got up to face the Ketzok corporal. “What’s the plan?”
Fuega coughed. “Orders from General Kline. You pull out, we shell, then we advance with heavy infantry.”
“Heavy infantry?”
“The Volpone have just beached in legion strength. They have heavy armour and weapons. We will clear the way
for their advance.” Fuega turned away. “You have fifteen minutes to withdraw.”
The Ghosts sat in a stupefied gaggle. “All this, all we lost, for nothing?” Domor sighed.
Varl was angry. “Teth those Volpone, and the Ketzok too! We die in the wire to open the beach and then they march
in and follow the tanks to glory!”
“I don’t know about you, sergeant, but I don’t want to be sitting here still, complaining about life, when those
Basilisks open up.”
Varl spat and sighed. “Me neither. Okay! By platoon team, call the retreat.”
The Ghosts all around scrambled up and prepared to fall back. Domor, looking up, caught Caffran by the arm.
“What?”
“Up there — do you see it?”
Domor pointed and Caffran looked up. The broken wall rose like a cliff above them, scabbed with slumping
masonry and broken reinforcement girders. Fifty metres up, just above a severed end of pipe work, Caffran saw the
door. “Teth, but your eyes are sharp!”
“There were tunnels in the wall, troop tunnels buried deep. This hole has cut through one of them and exposed it.”
Caffran called Varl over, and a group of Ghosts gathered to look up.
“We could get a fire-team inside the wall… follow the tunnel to where ever it led us.”
“Hell?” supposed Trooper Haven. “It’s high up…” Varl began.
“But the cliff is ragged and full of good handholds. The first man up could secure a line. Sergeant, it’s a plan…”
Varl looked round at Caffran. “I’d never make it, with one arm dead. Who’d lead?”
“I could,” said Sergeant Gorley of five platoon. He was a tall, barrel-chested man with a boxer’s nose. “You get
the wounded back onto the beach. I’ll take a squad and see what we can do.”
Varl nodded. He began to round up the walking wounded, and seconded several able bodies to help him with the
more seriously injured. Gorley selected his commando squad: Caffran, Domor, Mkendrik, Haven, Tokar, Bude,
Adare, Mkallun, Caill.
Mkendrik, raised in the mountains of Tanith Steeple, led off, clambering up the splintered wall, hand over hand.
He left his flamer and its tanks with Gorley, to raise them later on a line.
By the time the ascent was made, and ropes secured, their leeway was almost up, and the ten Ghosts were alone in
the chasm. Within moments, the Basilisks at the throat of the breach would start their bombardment.
The men went up quickly, following the ropes. Gorley was last, securing a line around the flamer unit and other
heavy supplies. The team at the top, crowded into the splintered doorway, hauled them up.
Gorley was halfway up the ascent when the bombardment began. The nine Ghosts above cowered into the shelter
of the concrete passageway they had climbed into and covered their ears at the concussion.
A shell hit the wall and vaporised Gorley, as if he had never been there.
Realising he was gone, Caffran urged the party to collect their equipment and move inwards. Soon this entire wall
section would be brought down.
The Ghost squad crept up the unlit passageway. Though generally intact, the tunnel had slumped a little following the
massive shockwave from the troop-ship crash. The ground was split in places, exposing crumbling rock. Pipes and
cables dangled from the cracked roof; dust trickled down from deep fissures. In places, the shock-impact had
sectioned the wall, cutting the originally straight and horizontal tunnel into a series of cleanly stepped slabs. The
Tanith clambered on, probing the dusty darkness with the cold green glare of assault lamps.
Behind them, the stonework of the great sea wall began to shake. The Ketzok had redoubled their furious work.
Caffran found himself leading, as if there had been an unspoken vote electing him in Gorley’s place. He presumed it
was because he had suggested this incursion in the first place. The Ghosts picked up their speed and moved deeper
into the tunnel system that threaded the marrow of the wall.
They reached a vertical communications shaft, down the centre of which ran a great wrought-iron spiral staircase.
The air was damp and smelled of wet brick and the sea. Shock damage was evident here too, and the bolts securing
the metal stairway and its adjoining walkways to the shaft-sides had sheared off or snapped. The entire metal
structure, hundreds of tonnes of it filling the shaft, creaked uneasily with each shuddering impact from the guns of the
distant Basilisks.
The Ghosts stepped across the metal landing of the stair-coil to where the tunnel resumed beyond. It squealed and
yelped with every step, sometimes threatening to tilt or fall.
Caill and Flaven were last across. A metal bolt-end the size of a man’s forearm rang off the gantry, just missing
Caill. It had come loose far above.
“Move!” yelled Caffran.
With a protesting, non-vocal scream, the staircase collapsed, tearing itself apart and rattling away down into the
black depths of the bottomless shaft. Where larger parts of the structure remained intact — a few turns of steps laced
together, a long section of handrail, a series of stanchion poles — they fell with heavy fury, raking sparks and
hideous shrieks from the shaft walls.
Empty, the stairs fallen away, the brick shaft seemed immense, uncrossable.
Domor looked back at the tunnel they had come along, out of reach now across the gulf. “No going back now…”
he muttered.
“Good thing that’s not the way we’re going,” Caffran replied, pointing into the darkness to come with the barrel of
his lasgun.
Wide cisterns opened up around them. The cement floors were painted with glossy green paint and the wall bricks
matt white. The walls tapered upwards so that the ceiling was narrower than the floor, and the whole tunnel turned a
few degrees to the left. The entire passageway was following both the line and the profile of the wall it ran through.
Grilled lighting panels, glowing phosphorescent white, hung at intervals from the roof. They looked like a giant
stream of tracer rounds, arcing off down the line of the tunnel, frozen in time.
Caffran’s Ghosts — and indeed now they were “his” Ghosts, bonding to him as leader now that they were cut off
from outside without asking or deciding — haunted the long passageways, hugging the walls in the fierce white glow
of the lights. Every sixty metres, tunnels bisected the main route on the inland side: deep, wide throats of brick and
concrete that sloped downwards. Mkendrik thought they might be drainage channels, but if that was true, the size
alarmed Caffran. They were big enough to take a man walking upright and just as broad. If that kind of liquid quantity
flooded these tunnels from time to time…
Domor believed the channels to be for personnel movement, or for running carts of ammo and supplies up to the
emplacements buried in the sides and along the top of the great sea wall. But they’d seen no vertical cargo shafts for
munitions lifting, and Caffran doubted sheer manpower could roll enough shells up the sloping channels without
mechanical assistance.
And they had met no one, not a trace of the Kith soldiery, not even a corpse.
“They’re all fully engaged, deploying on the defences,” Caill suggested.
Caffran thought it a fair bet. “We wanted to get inside, I figure we might get further than we expected.” They had
just reached the latest of the mysterious sloping shafts. Caffran nodded to it. “It leads into the heart of the island
itself. Let’s try it.”
“And then what?” Bude asked.
“Then?”
“I mean, what’s your plan, Caff?”
Caffran paused. Getting in, that had been everything. Now… “We’re inside,” he began, “no one’s got this far.”
Bude and others nodded. “But what then?” Flaven asked.
Again, Caffran was lost for words. “We… we… we see how far we can get. Inside.”
None demurred. Lighting in the sloped tunnel was built into the wall and hidden behind transparent baffles. The
concrete floor had a mesh grill set into it, providing greater purchase for walking.
They moved in formation. Half a kilometre, by Domor’s gyro-compass. A kilometre. The air became damp-cold.
The tunnel began to level out. The distant thump and shudder of the sea-wall assault dimmed behind them.
They heard the humming before they saw the end of the tunnel. A low, ululating throb that bristled the air. It
reminded Caffran of the heavy fruit-wasps in the nal-forests of Tanith, crossing glades on iridescent wings to bury
their long ovipositors into soft bark in search of nal-grubs to use as living kindergartens.
Adare, at the head of the pack with Mkallun, called out. The tunnel was sealed fifty metres ahead by a vast metal
hatchway. A thick ironwork seal surrounded a man-sized hatch closed with lever-latches and greased hydraulic
hinges. The door and its frame were painted matt green with rust-proof paint, all except the clean steel inner rods of
the extended hydraulics, which glittered with filmy brown oils.
The throbbing was coming from the far side of the hatch.
Adare checked the hatch seals, but they were wound tightly shut and locked, it seemed, from the other side.
Caffran shouldered his way forward and reached out a hand to the metal barrier. It was wet-cold but it tingled,
vibrating gently with the reverberations behind it.
“How do we get through?” Caffran murmured.
“Do we want to get through?” Bude returned.
Domor knelt down and started to open the clasps of his sweeper pack. Caffran noticed with some concern that
Domor was regularly pausing to fidget and scratch at his eyes now, as if irritated by persistent flies. Domor pulled
the head of the sweeper broom out of the pack, removed the soft cloth bag it was wrapped in, and carried it to the
wall with his set unit and his headphones. He plugged the headphones and the sweeper head into the unit and
switched it on, listening patiently to the clicking returns in his ear-pieces as he moved the flat pad of the sweeper
head across the metal door surround. Three or four times he stopped, went back to check, and then marked the green
painted metal with a graphite cross, using a stick he kept in his bicep pocket.
Domor turned back to Caffran, pulling his headphones back down around his neck. “The main internal lock for the
hatch is buried inside the frame. Those crosses mark the threads of the gears.”
Caffran let Tokar do the honours. He put a point-blank las round through each of the crosses, leaving round
puncture holes with sharp metal edges.
The latches and locks spun free easily now their mechanisms were ruined. Adare and Haven hauled the green
hatch open and the Ghosts crept forward into a blue, gloomy realm of smoke.
Caffran knew they were emerging on the land side of the great sea wall, deep in the refinery complex of Oskray
Island. They were exiting onto a lattice walkway of scrubbed iron that jutted out of the fastness wall and crossed a
gulf whose depths he had no way of judging. Above, below and around, everything was smoke. The walkway was
five metres wide, with a low handrail, and reached across forty metres to a tower that rose skeletally out of the haze.
The air smelled of cordite and salt. It was cold and clammy suddenly.
Caffran scanned around. Behind them, the way they had come, he was just able to make out the back of the vast sea
wall rising up, lost in the fog. The throbbing and pulsing was much louder now and Caffran knew it must be coming
from the fuel-mills, the promethium pumps and the other working systems of the vast refinery.
Domor was next to him, prying into the smoke with his prosthetic eyes. The focus rings were buzzing now, and he
strained with them. Thick, discoloured tears trickled down his stubbled cheeks. The salt water had really done its
devious work.
“This smoke is backwash from the enemy guns along the wall top,” Domor said. “The sea air and the downdraft of
our ships is blowing it back over the wall and it’s pooling here in the inner basin of the refinery.”
All the better for them to move unseen, thought Caffran, but… to where? Adrenaline had brought them so far.
Where was the plan?
They were nearly at the tower, a vast red-painted skeletal needle of girders with dull flashing lamps at the
corners. Other walkways stretched away from it into the soupy air. Caffran was beginning to make sense of the place,
and picked out other catwalks and walkways above, below and parallel to the one the Ghosts used, through the
billowing smoke.
Laser fire peppered down at them suddenly, rebounding from the iron walkway or punching through it. Bude
stumbled as a round hit him in the top of the left shoulder and exited through his right hip. Caffran knew he was dead,
but he tried desperately to get to him nevertheless. Bude leaned on the rail for a moment, upright, then pitched over
and fell away into the smoke below silently.
There were dark shapes on a catwalk forty metres above and to the left of them. More zinging fire spat down
through the clouds. The Ghosts opened up in return, pasting shots up into the roof of the smoke. A body fell past them.
Mkendrik swivelled his flamer and vomited huge curls of fire up at the enemy position. The catwalk above them
collapsed and spilled four fire-streaming comets down into the chasm: burning, screaming, flailing human forms.
Caffran led the way to the tower at a run and entered a grilled-off section that faced an open-sided elevator car.
Caill and Mkallun joined him first, the others close on their heels. A steep stairwell of open-backed mesh steps led
both down and up the tower alongside the open elevator shaft.
More las-fire, and stub rounds, started spanking off the ironwork and tinging around the metal cage of the tower.
“Which way?” bellowed Caill.
“Up!” Caffran decided.
“Where’s the sense in that? We’ll be trapped like rats at the top of the tower with nowhere to run!”
“No,” Caffran countered, trying desperately to think.
He was trying to bring back the briefing. The commissar had shown them aerial views of the Oskray facility,
concentrating on the sea wall area they were meant to assault. He tried to picture the other, inner derrick areas he had
glimpsed. Towers, dozens of them, just like the one on which they stood, bridging to each other at various levels,
including some higher than the sea wall. If that was true — if the memory was true — they could cross to other
towers higher up as well as lower down.
“Trust me,” Caffran said and started up the stairs, blasting las rounds over the side at distant walkways where
muzzles flashed in their direction.
They ascended.
Caffran fought the panic in his mind. The way in, the chance to sneak inside, had seemed a good plan, a brave
plan, but now they were here, eight men alone in a city of the enemy, he had no idea what they had even expected to
be able to achieve. There was no plan, not even the raw materials for a plan. He dreaded any of the others asking
him to explain their purpose here.
Fire from below; three or four storeys down, squads of Kith soldiery were moving up the tower, blasting upwards.
Las-rounds popped and thumped through the mesh steps around them. Mkallun lost the front of his foot and toppled,
screaming in pain. Adare, just a few steps below him, arrested his fall and hauled the whimpering man up with him.
The others blasted downwards and an odd vertical firefight began, laser salvos spitting up and down the tower
structure. Mkendrik, last of the ascending Ghosts, hosed the stairs below them with his flamer and belching clouds of
fire drizzled down through the open metal edifice and torched the closest of the pursuers.
Six more flights up, a bridging walkway opened to their left, crossing the smoky chasm to another tower. There
seemed to be no one on the other structure, and Caffran gestured the men across, stopping to help Adare with
Mkallun. Adare grabbed Caffran’s shoulder and pointed to the swiftly ascending elevator in the tower they were
leaving. It was packed with enemy troopers, climbing far faster than those on the stairs. Caffran sent Adare hobbling
onwards with Mkallun, then pulled a pair of tube-charges from his pack. He set short fuses and rolled them along the
bridge onto the tower deck, then ran to join the others.
The blast tore through the tower assembly, blowing out stanchions and main-supports all around. With a deafening
howl, the tower crumpled and collapsed, hundreds of metres of steeple section from above sliding down with almost
comical slowness, splintering the body of the tower below. The packed elevator car fell like a stone. Power servos
tore out and exploded. Secondary explosions rippled out into the gloom.
The collapse tore away the bridge they had just crossed by, and ripped the bridge supports out of their side of the
crossing, shearing metal and girders around them, shaking the other tower. Heavier impacts shook them as bridges
higher up tore loose with the descending tumult and came slamming or dragging down the length of their tower.
From below, as the tower mass crashed to the ground, other explosions fluttered out as fuel stores and pumps
detonated under the impact. Plumes of fire gusted around them.
“What the Feth have you done?” bellowed Flaven.
Caffran wasn’t sure. In desperation, he hadn’t really thought through the consequences of mining the tower. One
simple thing occurred to him.
“I’ve bought us some time,” he whispered.
Now they moved downwards, partly because down seemed to make sense, and partly because none of them trusted
the stability of the tower now that its neighbour had been torn so brutally away. They descended into thicker, blacker
smoke. Bright cinders floated on the wind and there was a deep, rank smell of burning fuel and spilt promethium.
Even from here, they knew the collapsing tower had done vast damage to the plant.
Down, thought Caffran. Still he had no plan he could speak of, but down seemed to be instinctively right. What
could they do here except perhaps some small, specific act? Like… take out the Kith’s command cadre.
He laughed to himself as he thought the words. Bold, ridiculous words. As if they could even find Sholen Skara
and his seniors in an island-hive this size. But it was a notion worth hanging on to.
A few hundred metres from the ground, he instructed his men to work stealthily, to do what the Ghosts did best.
They blackened their skin with soot from the handrails, and pulled down their camo-cloaks, melting into the darkness
of the smoke and the blackened tower-scaffold.
Below them, around the base of the tower, twisted, burning wreckage lay scattered five hundred metres in every
direction Flames leapt from small lakes of petroleum and mineral gels The debris from the fallen tower, some of it
great chunks of tower-section intact and twisted on the concrete, crushed beneath it smaller buildings and storage
blocks, cranes and other rig service vehicles. Charred bodies lay crumpled or burst here and there. They passed at
least one section of walkway dangling from their tower like a loose flap, clanking as it swung back and forth against
the girders. Reedy klaxons barked through the smoke like the sound of yapping guard dogs.
They strode out from the base of the tower into the wreckage in fire-team formation, Caffran and Tokar at point.
Domor supported the hopping Mkallun; Caffran wasn’t going to leave him behind.
Spools of chain, frayed wire hawsers, splashes of oil and metal litter covered the concourse. Caffran skirted
around a pair of Kith corpses, men who had clung together as they fell and been mangled into one hideous ruin by the
ground.
Sending Mkendrik ahead in his place, Caffran dropped back to check on Domor and Mkallun. A hefty shot of
analgesic had left Mkallun vacant, lolling and useless. Domor was blind. The iris shutters on his bionic implants had
finally failed and shut tight. Filmy fluid leaked around the focussing rings and wept down his face. It hurt Caffran to
see his friend like this. It was like Menazoid Epsilon all over again, when Domor had lost his eyes and still fought
on without them, playing his part with a valour and tenacity even Gaunt had been awed by.
“Leave us,” Domor told him. Caffran shook his head. He wiped away the sweat that beaded his brow and trickled
down the blue dragon tattoo on his temple. Caffran opened Mkallun’s pack and took out a one-shot plastic injector of
adrenaline, stamping it into Mkallun’s bare forearm. The injured trooper roared as he came out of his stupor. Caffran
slapped him.
“Domor will be your legs — you have to be his eyes.”
Mkallun growled and then spat and nodded as he understood. The adrenaline rush was killing all his pain and
refortifying his limbs.
“I can do it, I can do it…” he said, clutching hold of Domor hard.
They moved on. Beyond the area of debris, the hive complex was a warren of drum silos and loading docks, redwashed
girder towers marked with the Imperial eagle and then defaced with sickening runes of Chaos.
In one open concourse there was a row of fifty cargo trucks, flatbeds, smashed and burned out. Along one wide
access ramp, millions of sections of broken pipe and hose, scattered in small random mounds. Inside one damaged
silo, countless pathetic bodies were piled and jumbled: a mass grave of those Oskray workers who would not join
Skara’s cause.
So Flaven suggested. “Perhaps not,” Caffran said, covering his mouth and nose with the edge of his cloak as he
looked in. “Enemy insignia there, and armour. These aren’t long dead.”
“When have they found time to gather and pile their dead? There’s an assault going on!”
Caffran agreed with Flaven’s incredulity, but the signs were there. What purpose… what peculiar intent lay behind
this charnel heap?
They heard shots, a ripple of las-fire from beyond the silo and swung in close, moving with the shadows. More
shots, another almost simultaneous volley. Perhaps… a hundred guns, thought Caffran? He ordered them to stay down
and crept forward with Adare.
What they saw beyond the next bunker shocked them.
There was wide concourse, almost a kilometre square, at the heart of this part of the island complex. From the
markings on the ground, this had been a landing pad for the cargo lighters. Across the centre, a thousand Kith
soldiers stood in ranks of one hundred. Facing them was a messy litter of bodies which tractors with fork shovels
and dozer blades were heaping into freight trucks.
Caffran and Adare watched. The front rank of the Kith took twenty steps forward and turned to face the other
rows. At a signal from a nearby officer, what was now the front rank raised their weapons and cut the file of a
hundred men down in an uneven burst of gunfire. As the tractors pushed the bodies aside, the rank that had fired
stepped forward and marched to where their targets had been. They turned, waited. Another order. Another ripple of
fire.
Caffran wasn’t sure what sickened him most: the scale of the mass firing squads or the willing, uncomplaining
way each rank slew the last and then stepped forward and waited to be cut down.
“What the Feth are they doing?” Adare gasped.
Caffran thought for a moment, reaching into his memory to recover the parts of the briefing he had blanked. The
parts where Gaunt had spoken about Sholen Skara.
It came back to him, out of the darker reaches of his mind, recollections rising like marsh-gas bubbles out of the
mire of forgetfulness. Suddenly, Gaunt’s voice was in his ear, Gaunt’s image before him. The briefing auditorium of
the mighty troop-ship Persistence, Gaunt, in his long storm coat and cap, striding onto the dais under the stone lintel
of the staging, glancing up at the gilt spread-eagle with its double heads on the velvet drop behind him. Gaunt,
removing his coat and dropping it on the black leather chair, standing there in his dress jacket, taking off his cap once
to smooth his cropped hair as the men came to order.
Gaunt, speaking of the abominations and filthy concepts Caffran had blanked from his mind.
“Sholen Skara is a monster. He worships death. He believes it to be the ultimate expression of the Chaotic will.
On Balhaut, before we came in, he ran murder-camps. There, he ritually slaughtered nearly a billion Balhauteans.
His methods were inventive and—”
Even now, Caffran could not bring himself to think of Gaunt’s descriptions. The names of the foul species of
Chaos that Sholen Skara had commanded, the symbolic meaning of their crimes. Now though, he understood why
Ibram Gaunt, champion of human life and soldier of the divine Emperor, would so personally loathe the likes of the
monster called Skara.
“He kills to serve Chaos. Any death serves him. Here, we can be sure, he will have butchered any Imperiallyloyal
hive workers en masse. We can also be sure that if he believes defeat is close, he will begin a systematic purge
of any living things, including his own troops. Mass suicide, to honour Chaos. To honour the blasphemy they call
Khorne.”
Gaunt coughed at the word as if his gorge was rising, and a murmur of revulsion passed through the assembled
Ghosts.
“That is a way we have of winning. We can defeat him — and we can convince him he will be defeated and thus
save us the bother of killing them all. If he thinks he is losing, he will begin to slaughter his own as a final hymn of
defiance and worship.”
Caffran’s mind swam round to the present. Adare was speaking, “—fething more of them, Caff! Look!”
Kith soldiers, in their hundreds, were marching out onto the concourse to fall in behind the rows already
slaughtered.
Not slaughtered, thought Caffran: harvested. It reminded him of the rows of corn stooks back on the meadows of
Tanith, as the mechanical threshers came in reaping row after row.
Despite the sickness in his stomach, a sickness that pinched and viced with each echo of gunfire, Caffran smiled.
“What?” Adare asked.
“Nothing…”
“So what do we do now? What’s the plan?”
Caffran grinned again. He realised he did have a plan, after all. And he’d already executed it. When he’d brought
that tower crashing down, he’d made Sholen Skara believe a significant enemy force was inside Oskray Hive. Made
him believe that defeat loomed.
As a result, Skara was ordering the Kith to kill themselves, one hundred at a time. One hundred every thirty
seconds.
Caffran sat back. His aching body throbbed. There was a las-burn across his thigh he hadn’t even noticed before.
“You’re laughing!” said Adare, perplexed.
Caffran realised he was.
“Here’s the plan,” he said at last. “We wait.”
Afternoon squalls from the ocean were clearing the smoke from Oskray Hive, but even the wind and rain couldn’t
pry the stink of death from the great refinery. Formations of Imperial gunships shrieked overhead, pummelling the
rain clouds with their fire-wash.
Gaunt found Caffran asleep amongst several hundred other Ghosts under a tower piling. The young trooper
snapped to attention as soon as he realised who had woken him.
“I want you with me,” Gaunt said.
They crossed the great concourse of the refinery city, passing squads of Ghosts, Volpone and Abberloy Guardsmen
detailed at building-to-building clearance. Shouts and whistles rang commands through the air as the Imperial forces
took charge of the island hive and marshalled ranks of dead-eyed prisoners away.
“I never thought you to be a tactical man, Caffran,” Gaunt began as they walked together.
Caffran shrugged. “I have to say I made it up as I went along, sir.”
Gaunt stopped and turned to smile at the young Ghost. “Don’t tell Corbec that, for Feth’s sake, he’ll get ideas.”
Caffran laughed. He followed Gaunt into a blockhouse of thick stone where oil-drum stacks had been packed
aside to open a wide space. Sodium lamps burned from the roof.
A ring of Imperial Guardsmen edged the open area; Volpone mostly, but there were some Ghosts, including Rawne
and other officers.
In the centre of the open area, a figure kneeled, shackled. He was a tall, shaven-headed man in black, tight-fitting
robes. Powerful, Caffran presumed, had he been allowed to stand. His eyes were sunken and dark, and glittered out
at Gaunt and Caffran as they approached from the edge of the guarding circle.
“The little juicy maggot of the Imperial—” the figure began, in a soft, sugar-sweet tone. Gaunt smacked him to the
ground with the back of his fist to silence him.
“Sholen Skara,” Gaunt said to Caffran, pointing down at the sprawled figure who was trying to rise, despite his
fetters, blood spurting from his smashed mouth.
Caffran’s eyes opened wide. He gazed down.
Gaunt pulled out his bolt pistol, checked it, cocked it and offered it to Caffran. “I thought you might like the
honour. There’s no court here. None’s needed. I think you deserve the duty.”
Caffran took the proffered gun and looked down at Skara. The monster had pulled himself up onto his knees and
grinned up at Caffran, his teeth pink with blood.
“Sir—” Caffran began.
“He dies here, today. Now. By the Emperor’s will,” Gaunt said curtly. “A duty I would dearly liked to have saved
for myself. But this is your glory, Caffran. You wrought this.”
“It’s… an honour, commissar.”
“Do it… Do it, little Ghost-boy… What are you waiting for?” Skara’s sick-sweet tones were clammy and
insistent. Caffran tried not to look down into the sunken, glittering eyes.
He raised the gun.
“He wants death, sir.”
“Indeed he does! It is the least we can do!” Gaunt snapped.
Caffran lowered the gun and looked at Gaunt, aware that every eye in the chamber was on him.
“No, sir, he wants death. Like you told us. Death is the ultimate victory for him. He craves it. We’ve won here on
Sapiencia. I won’t soil that victory by handing the enemy what he wants.” Caffran passed the gun back to Gaunt, grip
first.
“Caffran?”
“You really want to punish him, commissar? Let him live.”
Gaunt thought for a moment. He smiled.
“Take him away,” he said to the honour guard as it closed ranks around Skara.
“I may have to promote you someday,” Gaunt told Caffran as he led him away.
Behind them, Skara screamed and begged and pleaded and shrieked. And lived to do so, again and again.
Brin Milo, Gaunt’s young adjutant, brought the commissar a tin cup of caffeine brew and the data-slates he hadn’t
requested — though he had been about to. Gaunt was sat on a camp chair on the deck outside his command shelter,
gazing out at the Tanith lines and the emerald glades of Monthax beyond them. Milo gave the data-slates to the
commissar and then paused as he turned away, guilty as he realised what he had done.
Gaunt eyed the slates, scrolling the charts on the lit fascia of the top one. “Mkoll’s surveys of the western
swamps… and the orbital scans of Monthax. Thank you.”
The boy tried to cover his mistake. “I thought you’d want to look them over,” he began. “When you attack today,
you’ll—”
“Who said I’d attack today?”
Milo was silent. He shrugged. “A guess. After last night’s action, so close, I thought…”
Gaunt got up and looked the boy squarely in the eyes. “Enough of your guesses. You know the trouble they might
cause. For me. For you. For all the Ghosts.”
Milo sighed and leaned against the rail of the command shed’s stoop where he attended the commissar. Midmorning
light lit the marshy groves beyond, lighting the tops of the tree cover an impossibly vivid green. Armoured
vehicles ambled through the mire somewhere, kilometres away. There was the distant thump of guns.
“Is there some crime…” he ventured at last, “in anticipation? Sir. Isn’t that what a good adjutant is supposed to
do? Anticipate his officer’s needs and requirements ahead of time? Have the right thing to hand?”
“No crime in that, Brin,” Gaunt replied, sitting back down. “That’s what makes a good adjutant, and you’re making
a fine job of being one. But… you anticipate too well sometimes. Some times it spooks me, and I know you. Others
might view it another way. I don’t need to tell you that.”
“No…”
“You know what happened in orbit last week. That was too close.”
“It was a conspiracy. I was set up.”
Gaunt wiped the sweat from his temple. “You were. But it was easy to do. You’d be an easy victim for a
determined manipulator. And if it came to that again, I’m not sure I could protect you.”
“About that… I have a request, sir. You do protect me… you have since Tanith.”
“I owe you. But for your intervention, I would have died with your world.”
“And from that you know I can handle myself in a combat situation. I want to be issued with a gun. I want to fight
with the Tanith in the next push. I don’t care what squad you put me in.”
“You’ve seen your share of fighting, Brin,” Gaunt said, shaking his head. “But I won’t make a soldier out of you.
You’re too young.”
“I was eighteen three days ago,” the boy said flatly.
Gaunt frowned. He hadn’t realised. He flapped away a persistent fly and sipped his cup. “Not a lot I can say to
counter that,” he admitted.
He sat back down. “What if we make a deal?”
Milo looked back at him with bright eyes and a cautious smile. “Like what?”
“I give you a brevet field rank, a gun, and stick you next to Corbec. In return, you stop anticipating — completely.”
“Completely?”
“That’s right. Well, I don’t mean stop doing your job. Just stop doing things that people could take the wrong way.
What do you say?”
“I’d like that. Thank you. A deal.”
Gaunt flashed him a rare smile. “Now go and find me Corbec and Mkoll. I need to run through some details with
them.”
Milo paused and Gaunt turned, looking down off the stoop to see the colonel and the scout sergeant standing side
by side, looking up at him expectantly.
“Milo suggested that we should stop by. When we had a chance,” Corbec said. “Is now a good time?”
Gaunt turned back to find Milo but the boy, probably on tin-basis of another wise anticipation, had made himself
scarce.
TEN
WITCH HUNT
Varl lifted the Tanith camo-cloak off the censer on the floor like a magician about to perform a conjuring trick. There
was a hushed silence around the ship’s hold as the veil came away.
The game was simple and enticing and completely fixed, and Sergeant Varl and the boy mascot made a good team.
They had a jar of fat, jumping lice scooped from the troop-ship’s grain silos and that beaten old censer borrowed
from the Ecclesiarch chapel. The censer was a hollow ball of rusty metal whose hemispheres hinged open so that
incense could be crumbled into the holder inside and lit. The ball’s surface was dotted with star-shaped holes.
“The game is simple,” Varl began, holding up the jar and jiggling it so all could see the half dozen, thumb-sized
bugs inside. He held it in his mechanical hand, and the servos hummed and whirred as he agitated the glass.
“It’s a guessing game. A game of chance. No trickery, no guile.”
Varl was something of a showman, and Milo liked him very much. He was one of what Milo regarded as the inner
circle of Ghosts, a close friend of Corbec and Larkin, one of a gaggle of tight-knit friends and comrades mustered
together from the militia of Tanith Magna at the founding. Varl’s sharp tongue and speak-your-mind attitude had
retarded his promotion chances early on, but then he had lost his arm on Fortis Binary during the heroic reconquest
of the forge world and by the time of the now-legendary actions of Menazoid Epsilon he had been made a squad
sergeant. Many thought it was well past time. Next to the ruthless command styles of Rawne and Feygor, and the
intense military mindset of the likes of Mkoll and the commissar himself, Varl, like the beloved Colonel Corbec,
injected a note of humanity and genial compassion into the Ghosts’ command structure. The men liked him: he told
jokes as often as Corbec, and they were for the most part funnier and cruder; his prosthetic arm proved he was not
shy of close fighting; and he could, in his own, informal, garrulous way, spin a fine, inspiring speech to rouse his
squad if the need called for it.
Just now though, in one of the troop-ship’s echoing holds with an audience of off-duty guardsmen roused from
their cots and stoves all around, he was turning his charismatic tongue to something far more important. The pitch.
“Here’s the deal, my friends, my brave fellow guardsmen, praise be the Golden Throne, here’s the deal.”
He spoke clearly, slowly, so that his sing-song Tanith accent wouldn’t confuse the other guard soldiers here. Three
other regiments were sharing this transport with the Ghosts: big, blond, square-jawed brutes from the Royal Volpone
50th, the so-called Bluebloods; sallow-skinned, idle-looking compact men from the 5th Slamabadden; and tall,
tanned, long-haired types from the 2nd Roane Deepers. Worlds and accents, separated by a common tongue. Varl
worked his crowd with care and precision, making sure nothing he said was lost or misunderstood.
He handed the censer to Milo, who opened it. “See now, a metal ball, with surface holes. The grain-lice go in the
ball…” He tipped a couple from his jar out into the censer as Milo held it ready. “And my young friend here closes it
up. Notice how I’ve scratched a number next to all the holes. Thirty-three holes, a number next to each. No tricks, no
guile… you can examine the ball if you like.”
Varl took the rusty ball from Milo and set it on the floor where all could see. A large washer welded to the
censer’s base stopped it from rolling. “Now, see, I sets it down. The lice want the light, right? So sooner or later,
they’ll hop out… through one of the holes. There’s the game. We wager on the number.”
“And we lose our money,” said a Deeper near the front, his voice twanged with that odd, rounded Roane accent.
“We’ll all make a bet, friend,” Varl said. “I will, you will, anyone else. If you guess the right number or get
closest, you win the pot. No tricks, no guile.”
As if on cue, a bug emerged from one of the star-shaped holes and lit off onto the deck, where a Blueblood
crunched it sourly underfoot.
“No matter!” Varl cried. “Plenty more where he came from… and if you’ve seen the grain silos, you’ll know what
I mean!”
That brought general laughter and keen sense of suffering comradeship. Milo smiled. He loved the way Varl could
play a crowd.
“What if we don’t trust you, Ghost?” asked a Blueblood, the big ox who had mashed the bug. He wore his grey
and gold twill breeches and black boots, but was stripped down to his undershirt. His body was a mass of wellnourished
muscles and he stood two heads taller than Varl. Arrogance oozed from him.
Milo tensed. He knew that some rivalry existed between the Ghosts and the Bluebloods, ever since Voltemand. No
one had ever said, but the rumour was that the Blueblood’s own commanders, steering the invasion force, had
ordered the barrage on the Voltis riverbed where so many Ghosts had died. The Bluebloods, so high and Emperordamned
mighty, seemed to despise the “common born” Ghosts, but then they despised everyone. This aristocratic
giant, with his hooded eyes and bullying manner, had at least six friends in the crowd, and all were as big as him.
What the feth do they feed them on back home to raise such giants? Milo wondered.
Varl, unconcerned, got down off the crates he had been using as a stage and approached the giant. He held out his
hand. It whirred. “Ceglan Varl, Sergeant, Tanith First-and-Only. I admire a man who can express his doubts…
sergeant?”
“Major Gizhaum Danver De Banzi Haight Gilbear, Royal Volpone 50th.” The giant didn’t offer to take the
outstretched hand.
“Well, major, seems you’ve no reason to trust a low-life like me, but it’s all a game, see? No tricks, no guile. We
all make a bet, we all have a laugh, we all pass the voyage a little quicker.”
Major Gilbear did not seem convinced.
“You’ve rigged it. I’m not interested if you place a bet.” He swung his look past Varl and took in Milo. “Let your
boy do it.”
“Oh. Now, that’s just silly!” Varl cried. “He’s just a kid… he knows nothing about the fine and graceful art of
gamesmanship. You want to play this with gamblers!”
“No,” Gilbear said simply. Others in the crowd agreed, and not just Bluebloods. Some seemed in danger of
walking away, disinterested.
“Very well, very well!” Varl said, as if it was breaking his heart. “The boy can play in my stead.”
“I don’t want to, sir!” Milo squeaked. He prayed his outburst had the right mix of reluctance and concern, and that
it didn’t sound too much on cue.
“Now then, lad,” Varl said, turning to him and putting a heavy bionic arm around his shoulders paternally. “Be
good now and play along so that the nice gentlemen here can enjoy a simple game.” Unseen to all others present, he
winked at Milo. Milo fought the fiercest battle of his life not to laugh.
“O-okay,” he said.
“The boy will play in my place!” Varl said, turning back to the crowd and raising his arms. There was cheers and
applause in reply.
They set to it. A larger crowd gathered. Paper markers were handed out and coin produced. Gilbear decided to
play, as did two Roane Deepers and three of the Slammabadden. In the crowd, secondary bets were laid on winners
and losers. Varl opened the censer and took up his jar.
Gilbear plucked it from his hand, opened it and dropped the lice out onto the deck, crunching them all underfoot.
He held it out to one of his men. “Raballe! Go fetch fresh lice from the silos!”
“Sir!”
“What is this?” Varl gasped, dropping to his knees and wiping away what seemed to Milo a real tear as he
surveyed his crushed insects. “Do you not even trust my lice, Major Gilbear, Blueblood, sir?”
“I don’t trust anything I can crush with my boot,” Gilbear replied, looking down and apparently dangerously close
to stamping on Varl too. A tidal change swept through the secondary betting, some of it in sympathy with the damaged
Ghost and his crushed pets, some sensing trickery was routed and heaping money on the Blueblood major.
“You could have drugged them, overfed them — they seemed docile. You could place your money on the lower
holes so that the sluggish things simply fell from the bottom as gravity pulled.” Gilbear smiled at his deduction and
his men growled approval. So did several of the wily Slammabadden, and Milo was afraid the mood might turn ugly.
“I’ll tell you what,” Varl said to the major as he got up. The Blueblood’s second was returning with a jar packed
full of agitated lice and semi-digested meal where he had scooped it from the dank silos. “We’ll use your pick of the
bugs…and you can set the censer whichever way up you like.” Varl pulled a cargo hook from the crates behind him
to use as a makeshift base. “Happy?”
Gilbear nodded.
They made ready. The gamblers, Milo included, prepared to make their guess on the paper slips provided. Varl
flexed his good shoulder, as if easing out an old hurt. A signal, the next guile.
“I’ll play this too,” Caffran said, pushing forward through the huddle. He seemed to sway and he stank of sacra.
Many gave him a wide berth.
“Cafy, no… you’re not up to it…” Varl murmured.
Caffran was pulling out a weight of coins, rolls of thick, high-issue disks.
“Give me the paper… Hike a bet,” Caffran mumbled, slurring.
“Let your Ghost play,” Gilbear growled with a smirk as Varl began to protest.
It looked to all present like the Tanith showman had lost control of his simple game, and if there had been any
trickery in it, any guile, then all of it was ruined now.
The first line went in. Gilbear spun the censer and set it down. Markers were overturned. A Slammabadden came
closest, closest to guessing the exit by three holes. Milo was nowhere near and seemed to whimper. Caffran raged as
his money was scooped away. He produced more.
A Deeper won the next, the winner of the last round given the honour of placing the censer. He was no closer than
five holes, but the others were grouped and very wrong. Milo begged Varl to let him stop but Varl shook him off,
glancing sidelong at the glowering Gilbear.
Gilbear won the next by guessing within two. He collected a massive pile of coins and one of the Deepers
dropped out in disgust. The level of the bets — and off-game bets — had risen considerably and now real money
was at stake. Cash was changing hands all around. The Bluebloods were jubilant and so were others. Others still
bemoaned their losses. Two more Slammabadden and another Deeper stepped up to play, their bets bolstered by
whip-rounds amongst their friends. No Blueblood dared to play against Gilbear. Flushed with success, Gilbear
placed his won pot again, and doubled it. Some of the guardsmen present, especially the Deepers and the watching
Ghosts, had never seen so much ready cash in their lives Caffran made a fuss and swigged from a bottle of sacra,
imploring his friend Brostin for a sub which was eventually, reluctantly, given.
The next round. Gilbear and a Deeper, each three holes away from the winning aperture, split the now
considerable pot.
The next round. Playing was Gilbear, three of the Slammabadden, two Deepers, Caffran (now subbing from a
worried-looking Raglon, Brostin having exited in a convincing rage) and Milo. A huge pile of wagers.
Caffran came out two off the mark, a Slammabadden was one off. Gilbear was on the other side of the censer.
Milo was spot on.
Howls, anger, jubilation, tumult.
“He was just lucky,” Varl said, collecting up the winnings. “Are we done?”
“The boy got a fluke,” Gilbear said, ordering his subalterns to empty their pockets. Another big wager was
assembled. The Deepers had dropped out, and so had Caffran, leaving the chamber with Raglon. The Slammabadden
mustered their strengths into one wager.
Milo turned the censer and set it down.
Silence.
The bug ticked and bounced against the inside of the metal ball. It emerged.
Milo had it again, spot on.
Pandemonium. It seemed like a riot would overturn the troop bay. Varl collected the winnings and the censer and
pulled Milo out of the chamber by the scruff of his tunic. Men were shouting, milling around, and a fight had begun
over the outcome of one of the side-bets.
In the companionway that led back to the Tanith troop deck, Varl and Milo rejoined Caffran, Raglon and Brostin.
They were all laughing, and Caffran seemed suddenly sober. He would have to wash his tunic to get the stink of
sacra out of it, of course.
Varl grinned at them and held up the bulky pouch containing their winnings. “Spoils to be divided, my friends!” he
announced to them, slapping Milo across the back with his bionic arm. He had never got used to its strength and Milo
nearly fell.
Caffran uttered a warning. Dark shapes loomed down the companionway behind them. It was Gilbear and four of
his men.
“You’ll pay for that trickery, whore’s-son,” Gilbear told Varl.
“It was a fair game,” began Varl, but realised at once that his silver tongue was useless now.
There were five on each side, but each of the Bluebloods towered over Brostin, the largest of the Tanith present.
In a close-quarter brawl, the Ghosts might score, draw even perhaps, but it would be bloody.
“Is there a problem?” asked the sixth member of the Tanith scam team. Bragg pulled his vast bulk into the light
behind his comrades, squinting in a relaxed way down at the five Bluebloods. He seemed to fill the corridor.
The Ghosts parted to let Bragg lumber through. He adopted the slow gait Varl had trained him in, to emphasise his
power. “Go away, little Bluebloods. Don’t make me hurt you,” he said, repeating the cue Varl had also given him. It
came out stilted and false, but the Bluebloods were too amazed at his size to notice.
They turned. With a final scowl, Gilbear followed them. The Ghosts began to laugh so hard, they wept.
Below him, Monthax, green, impenetrable.
Gaunt gazed down through the arched viewports of the hexathedral Sanctity, studying the distant surface of the
planet that, within a week, his forces would be assaulting, from time to time, he referred to a data-slate map in his
hand, checking off geographical details. The dense jungle cover was the biggest problem they faced. They had no
idea of the hidden enemy’s strength.
Advance reports suggested a vast force of Chaos filth had retreated from a recent engagement at Piolitus and dug
in here. Warmaster Macaroth was taking no chances. Around the huge bulk of the orbiting hexathedral, a colossal
towered platform designed as a mustering point for the invasion forces, great legions massed. Over a dozen huge
troop-ships were already docked around the crenellated rim of the hexathedral’s skirt platform, like fat swine at the
teats of their obese mother, and tugs were easing another in now to join them. More were due. Further away, Imperial
battlecruisers and escort ships, including the frigate Navarre on which Gaunt and the Ghosts had been stationed for a
while, sat at high orbit anchor, occasionally buzzing out clouds of attack squadrons heading off for surface runs or
patrol sweeps.
Gaunt turned from the windows and stepped down a short flight into the cool, echoing vastness of one of the
Sanctity’s main tactical chapels, the Orrery. A vast circular dial was set flush in the centre of the chamber’s floor,
thirty metres across and made of intricate, interlocking, moving parts of brass and gold, like a giant timepiece. As it
whirred and cycled, the three dimensional globe of coloured light it projected upwards altered and spun, advancing
data, chart runes, bars of information across the luminous surface.
Trim uniformed Guard officers, robed members of the Ecclesiarch and the Munitorium, Navy commanders in their
Segmentum Pacificus deck dress, and the hooded deaconal staff of the hexathedral itself, prowled the edges of the
great fight Orrery, consulting the data and conferring in small groups. Skeletal servitors, emaciated, wired into the
machine banks via cables from their eyes, spines, mouths and hands, hunkered in booth-cribs, murmuring and
chattering. Around the sides of the great chamber, under cloistered roofing, great chart tables were arranged at
intervals, each showing different sections of Monthax. Staff groups stood around every table, engaged in more
specific and detailed planning sessions. The air chimed with announcements and updates, some of these overlapping
and chattering with data noise. The Orrery turned, whirring, and new details and deployments appeared.
Gaunt walked a circuit of the chamber, nodding to those fellow officers he knew, saluting his seniors. The whole
place had an exceptional, expectant hush, like a great hunting animal, breathless, coiled to pounce.
The commissar decided it was time he took a walk down to the Ghosts’ troop-ship. The men would be restless,
awaiting news of debarkation and deployment, and Gaunt knew well that trouble was always likely to brew when
guardsmen were cramped together in transportation, idle and nervous.
And bored. That was the worst of it. In any Guard regiment, disciplinary matters rose in number during such times,
and he and the other commissars, the political enforcers of the Imperial Guard, would be busy. There would be
brawls, thefts, feuds, drunkenness, even murder in some of the more barbaric regiments, and such disorder quickly
spread without the proper control.
Across the chamber, Gaunt saw General Sturm, the commander of the Volpone 50th and some of his senior aides.
Sturm did not seem to see him, or chose not to acknowledge Gaunt if he did, and Gaunt made no effort to salute. The
crime of Voltemand was still raw in his mind, despite the interval of months. When he learned that the Volpone
Bluebloods and the Ghosts would encounter each other again at Monthax, for the first time since Voltemand, he had
been apprehensive. The action on Menazoid Epsilon had shown him personally what a long-standing feud between
regiments could do. But there was no chance of redeployment, and Gaunt comforted himself that it was only Sturm
and his senior staff he had a problem with. The rank and file of the Ghosts and the Bluebloods had no reason for
animosity. He would keep a careful watch, but he was sure they could billet side by side safely enough until the
assault sent them their separate ways.
And, unlike on Voltemand, Sturm wasn’t in charge here. The Monthax offensive was under the supreme command
of Lord Militant General Bulledin.
Gaunt saw Commissar Volovoi, serving with the Roane Deepers, and stopped to talk with him.
It was mostly inconsequential chat, though Volovoi had heard some word that Bulledin had consulted the
Astropathicus. Rumours of psyker witchery on the planet below had started to spread.There was talk that auguries
and the Tarot had been consulted to deter mine the truth of the situation.
“Last thing we need,” muttered Volovoi to Gaunt. “Last thing I need. The Roane are the very devil to keep in line.
Good fighters, yes, when they’re roused to it, but damned idle for the most part. A few weeks of transportation
confinement like this, and I’ll have to kick each and every one of their arses to get them down the drop-ship ramp.
Languid, lazy — and this makes it worse: they’re superstitious, more than any band of men I’ve ever known. The
rumours of witchcraft will get them spooked and that will make my work twice as hard.”
“I sympathise,” Gaunt said. He did. His old regiment, the Hyrkans, were tough as deck plate, but there had been
times when the thought of psyker madness had balked them in their tracks.
“What of you, Gaunt?” Volovoi asked. “I hear you’re taken up with a low-tech rabble now. Don’t you miss the
Hyrkan discipline?”
Gaunt shook his head. “The Tanith are sound, quietly disciplined in their way.”
“And you have actual command of them too, is that right? Unusual. For a commissar.”
“A gift of the late Slaydo, may the Emperor watch his rest. I resented it at first, but I’ve grown to like it.”
“You’ve done well with them, so I hear. I read the reports on that campaign in the Menazoid Clasp last year, and
they say your men turned the key that opened the door at Bucephalon too.”
“We’ve had our moments.”
Gaunt realised Volovoi was studying something over Gaunt’s shoulder.
“Don’t turn, Gaunt,” Volovoi went on, without changing the timbre of volume of his talk. “Are your ears burning?
Someone’s talking about you.”
“How so?”
“The Blueblood general. Sturm, is it? Arrogant piece of yak flop. One of his officers just came on deck and is
bending his ear. And they’re looking this way.”
Gaunt didn’t turn. “Let me guess: the newcomer is a big ox with hooded eyes?”
“Aren’t they all?”
“This one’s a piece of work even by the Volpone standards of breeding. A major.”
“That’s what his rank pins say. You know him?”
“Not particularly, though even that is more than I’d care for. Name’s Gilbear. He and I and Sturm had a…
difference of opinion on Voltemand eighteen months ago.”
“What sort of difference?”
“They cost me several hundred men.”
Volovoi whistled. “You’d think it would be you whispering about them!”
Gaunt smiled, though it was dark. “We are, aren’t we, Volovoi?”
Gaunt made to leave. Crossing the Orrery deck, he was afforded a better view of the Volpone staff. Gilbear was
stood alone now, staring at Gaunt with a burning look that did not flinch. Sturm, escorted by his aides, was heading
up the long flight of steps to the Lord Militant General’s private chambers in the spire above.
Walking the troop decks with Gaunt, Corbec brought his commander up to speed.
“Quiet really. There was a fight over some rations, but it was nothing and I broke it up. Costin and two of his pals
got falling down tipsy inhaling paint thinners in the armour shops and Costin then fell down for real, breaking his
shin.”
“I’ve warned the armouries to lock that sort of material up…”
“They did, but Costin has a way with locks, sir, if you get me.”
“Put him and the others on report and punishment detail.”
“I’d say Costin’s paid for his ill-gotten—” Corbec began.
“I won’t stand for it. They’ve got rations of grog and sacra. I can’t use men with fume-ruined heads.”
Corbec scratched his chin. “Point there, sir. But the men get bored. And some of them use their sacra rations up in
the first few days.”
Gaunt turned to his second, anger flickering in his eyes. “Let it be known, Colm: the Emperor grants them
recreational liquor and smokes. If they abuse that privilege, I’ll take it away. From all of them. Understand?”
Corbec nodded. They stopped at the rail and looked down into the vast troop bay. The air was laced with smoke
and rank sweat. Below them, bench cots by the hundred in rows, men by the hundred, sleeping, dicing, chatting,
praying, some just staring into nothing. Priests walked the rows, dispensing solace and benediction where it was
requested or simply needed.
“Is there something on your mind, sir?” Corbec asked.
“I think trouble’s brewing,” Gaunt said. “I’m not sure what yet, but I don’t like it.”
There was someone moving in the outer room.
Gaunt awoke. It was night cycle on the troop-ship and the wall lamps had been doused by the automatic control.
He had fallen asleep on his cot with a weight of data sheets and slates on his chest.
Movement from the ante-room beyond his bed quarter had roused him.
Gaunt rose silently, placing the data sheets on a wall shelf. His boltgun and chainsword were slung over a wooden
statue in the outer room, but he pulled a compact laspistol from his foot locker and slid it into the back of his
waistband. He was dressed in his boots, trousers, braces and an undershirt, He thought for a moment about redonning
his jacket and cap, but cast the idea aside.
The cot-room door was ajar. The light of a tight-beam flash light stabbed the darkness beyond. Someone was
going through his things.
He moved in an instant, kicking open the door and grabbing the intruder from behind, turning him, twisting his
arms, and slamming him face first into the round observation port of the outer room. The man — robed, struggling —
protested until the moment of impact. His nose broke against the glass and he lolled unconscious.
The lights went on. Gaunt sensed there were two others behind him. He heard the whine of charging las-packs.
He spun and threw his unconscious prey at the nearest, who tumbled under the weight. The other tried to take a
bead with his gun, but Gaunt dropped, slid sideways, and broke his jaw with a heavy blow. Only then, a few seconds
after the whole thing had begun, did he see the man he had dropped was a security trooper dressed in the brown
armour of the hexathedral. His comrade, scrambling up from under the weight of the fallen robed man, lunged
forward, and Gaunt turned, catching his probing hands, breaking an elbow with a deft twist and then flooring him
with a straight punch to the bridge of the nose.
Gaunt pulled out his compact and covered the room. Two hexathedral troopers and a man in long robes lay at his
feet, twitching and moaning.
The door opened.
“Many would look with disfavour at such violence, commissar,” the figure who entered the room announced
softly.
Gaunt kept the gun trained at the intruder’s throat. “Many look on intrusion and burglary in a similar way. Identify
yourself.”
The figure moved into the light. She was tall, dressed in a simple uniform of black: boots, breeches, jacket. Her
ash-fair hair was pinned tight up around her skull. Her face was calm, angular, lean, beautiful.
“I am Lilith. Inquisitor Lilith.”
Gaunt lowered the pistol and set it down on the side-table. “You have not requested my seal of office. You believe
me then?”
“I know of you. Pardon, ma’am; there are few females holding your rank and duty.”
Lilith moved forward into the room and gently kicked one of the troopers. He moaned and roused. “Get yourself
out of here. These two as well.”
The bloodied trooper clambered to his feet and dragged the others out.
“I apologise, commissar,” Lilith said. “I had been told you were in a planning session. I would not have sent my
men in if I had known you were sleeping here.”
“You’d have had my rooms searched had I been absent?”
She turned to him and laughed. It was attractive, confident — and hard. “Of course! I’m an inquisitor, commissar.
That’s what I do.”
“What, precisely, is it you’re doing here?”
“The boy.” She pulled out a chair and sat back, leaning against the back rest with relaxed ease. “I need to know
about the boy. Your boy, commissar.”
Gaunt stayed where he was and fixed his gaze on her. “I don’t like your tone, or your methods,” he growled. “If I
continue not to like them, I can assure you the fact you are a woman won’t—”
“Are you really threatening me, commissar?”
Gaunt breathed deeply. “I believe I am. You saw what I did to your lackeys. I won’t stand for this unless you show
me good reason.”
Lilith sighed and steepled her long, pale fingers. Then she pointed the compact laspistol right at Gaunt.
He started, amazed. She had not moved, but now she held a gun which had been lying right across the room from
her.
“How good a reason do I need?” she asked, smiling. Gaunt stepped back.
“That little demonstration would seem good enough…”
Lilith smiled and dropped the gun into her lap. She clasped her hands together again and set her head back.
“Good. We’ll begin. By the proclamation of the Most High Emperor, governed as I am by His will, in totality, till
the end of all days, as a servant of the Inquisition, I require you to furnish with me with answers of complete truth
and veracity to your best knowledge. The penalties for deception are manifold and without limit. Do you
understand?”
“Get on with it.”
She smiled again. “I like you, commissar. ‘The very devil’, they said. They were right.”
“Who’s ‘they’?”
Lilith didn’t answer. She rose, holding the pistol loose in her left hand. She circled Gaunt. He was unnerved by
her masculine height and her unblinking stare.
“Skipping further formalities, as you suggest, why don’t you tell me about the boy?”
“What boy?”
“So coy. His name is Brin Milo, a Tanith native, part of your cadre but a civilian.”
“What do you want to know, inquisitor?”
“Oh, everything, Ibram; everything.”
Gaunt cleared his throat. “Milo is… here by chance. The regimental piper, mascot… my aide.”
“Why?”
“He’s smart, sharp, eager. The men like him. He can do the jobs I ask of him quickly and efficiently.”
Lilith held up a finger. “Start from the beginning. Why is he here?”
“When Chaos fell on Tanith, and consumed it, I elected to withdraw all the able bodied men I could from the
world. My own exit was barred and the boy intervened, clearing my way. In gratitude, I took him with me. He’s too
young for infantry, so I made him my aide.”
“Because of his skills?”
“Yes. And because there was nothing other to be done with him.”
Lilith came close to Gaunt and stared into his eyes. “What are his skills?”
“Efficiency, ability, keenness to—”
“Really, commissar. You can admit it. Taking a liking to a clean-limbed young cabin mate and—”
The slap resounded in the close air of the cabin. Lilith didn’t flinch. She turned away, laughing.
“Very good. Very direct. So we can cut the crap, can we? I have notice that the boy is a witch. How do you
respond?”
“He is not.” Gaunt swallowed. “The poison of the warp turns my guts. You think I would have truck with it for a
second?” He paused. “Present company excepted, naturally.”
Lilith circled him. “But he’s useful. I’ve done my ground work, Gaunt. He predicts things, guesses them before
they happen… attacks, incidents, what files the commissar needs. What the commissar wants for breakfast—”
“That’s no witchcraft. He’s smart. He anticipates.”
“There was a game… a scam… in the lower decks. He was a key part of it. He knew how to win it. He was
perfect in his guesses. What do you say to that?”
“I say: who put you up to this?”
“Does it matter?”
“It was Sturm, wasn’t it? And his pet ox, Gilbear. They have an agenda; how can you trust their word?”
She faced him and fixed him with her eyes. “But of course. They cannot hide it from me. Sturm and Gilbear hate
you and despise your Ghosts. They tried to obliterate you on Voltemand and failed. Now they seek to bring you down
by whatever means they have.”
Gaunt was almost speechless. “You know this and still you come here?”
“I’m an inquisitor, Ibram,” she replied with a smile. “Sturm and his men are brutes. I have no interest in their
internecine hatred for you and your men. But Lord Militant General Bulledin has brought me here to assess and
sanction the dangers of witchcraft during the liberation of Monthax. Enemy witchcraft… and also that which lurks
within like a cancer. The boy has been brought to my attention and I am duty bound to examine the evidence. They
say he’s a witch. I don’t care why they say it or what they hope to earn from such accusations. But if they’re right…
That’s why I’m here. Is Milo touched? Is he psyker? Don’t protect him, Gaunt. It will be so much the worse for you if
you do.”
“He isn’t. This is all political nonsense. The Bluebloods have seen a potential weakness they wish to exploit.”
“We’ll sec. I need to speak with this Milo. Now.”
To be summoned by his commissar during night cycle was not, I new experience for Brill Milo; there were often outof-
hours errands to be run. But as soon as he arrived outside Gaunt’s quarters, he realised something was wrong.
Gaunt was in full dress uniform, with jacket and cap, and his face was grim. A tall woman in black with an oddly
malevolent air about her waited to the side.
“This servant of the Emperor has some questions for you,” Gaunt explained. He refrained from using the loaded
word ‘inquisitor’. “Answer her honestly and directly.”
Wordlessly, Lilith led them down the long deck hall and into the docking ring. They crossed over into the
hexathedral itself Milo was apprehensive. He had not set foot on the great docking craft before. The air smelled
different, sacred and cool after the stuffy humidity of the troop transport, and the scale of the chambers they passed
through startled him. The only people they met were deacons in robes, brown-armoured troopers and small groups of
ranking officers. It was another world.
Lilith led the way on a route that took twenty minutes to walk and passed through several main chapels and
chambers of the hexathedral, including the Orrery. Gaunt understood her tactics. The route was overlong and
unnecessary, except it would disarm and over-awe the boy and make his psychological reserve weaker. She was
clever to the point of cruel.
They reached an iris shutter at the end of a long corridor flanked by windows of stained glass. Lilith made a slight
gesture with her hand and the hatch spiralled open. She waved the boy inside and turned on the threshold to speak
with Gaunt.
“You may attend, but make no interruption. Gaunt, you’re a valuable officer, and if this boy turns out to be tainted,
I can make it so you suffer nothing more than a slight reprimand for being unaware of his status.”
“A generous suggestion. What are the conditions?”
Lilith smiled. “We are complementary instruments, commissar, you and I. My duty is to worm out corruption,
yours is to punish it. If Milo is corrupt, you will exonerate yourself by performing summary execution yourself. It
will reflect your outrage and determination to clean house.”
Gaunt was silent. The possibility clawed at his mind.
“There would be no other way to salvage your reputation, command or career. Indeed your very life may be forfeit
if it is thought you conspired to protect a pawn of the Darkness. Do you hear me, Gaunt?”
“I hear your threat to my life and its future. I deal with threats as a profession.”
“Then I’ll be blunter. Sturm has initiated this process because he sees it as a way of bringing you and the Ghosts
down. If Milo is corrupt and you do not distance yourself from him and act like a commissar, your life will be over
— and Sturm will make sure the Ghosts are dismantled. He has already seeded the idea in Bulledin’s mind that if
one Ghost is a witch, so might others be. The Tanith first would be taken, to a man, by the Inquisition and they would
all suffer extreme investigation. Most would die. The rest would be cast aside as no longer fit to serve the Imperial
Guard. I am bound by duty to investigate Sturm’s claim. I do not wish to be party to his vendetta against the Tanith,
but I will become so if you do not act accommodatingly, willingly and honourably.”
“I see. Thank you for your candour.”
“Chaos is the greatest threat mankind faces, Gaunt. We cannot allow psychic power to exist within any untrained
mind. If the boy is touched, he must be destroyed.”
“Not evaluated by the Black Ships… as you were?”
She looked at him with a sharp frown. “Not this time. The political situation is too delicate. If Milo is a witch, he
must be put to death to appease all parties.”
“I see.”
She nodded and stepped inside. Gaunt paused and found himself looking down at his holstered bolt pistol. Could
he do it? The life of every Ghost might depend on the sacrifice of Milo, and to have struggled to bring them so far, to
save them and give them purpose was not something Gaunt felt he could throw aside. He owed it to the Tanith to do
all he could to safeguard them. But to execute Brin… the boy who had selflessly saved his life, selflessly served… it
went so against his personal honour the thought crushed his chest.
Yet if the boy really was touched, really was tainted with the unbearable stain of Chaos…
His face grim and cold, he ducked inside, and the iris hatch whispered shut behind him.
The room was wide and high, lacking windows in its walls but sporting a great circular port in the roof. Stars
gleamed down from above and their light was almost all there was, except for small, dim lamps set around the edges
of the floor. There was a carpet on the floor, a thick, coloured weave that bore the Imperial eagle crest. Two seats,
facing each other, sat in the centre of the carpet — a high-backed wooden throne with knurled armrests, and a
smaller wooden stool. Lilith sat on the stool and motioned Milo to occupy the huge throne. Its wooden embrace
seemed to swallow him up. Gaunt stood back, watching uneasily.
“Your name?”
“Brin Milo.”
“I am Lilith. I am an inquisitor.” That word now, finally, biting the air with its menace and threat. Milo’s eyes
were wide and fearful.
She asked him about Tanith, his past, his life there. He answered, halting at first, but as her questions flowed —
innocent, innocuous questions about his memories — he spoke more confidently.
She asked him to recount his first meeting with Gaunt, his memories of the fall of Tanith, the choice he had made to
fight for Gaunt there.
“Why? You were not a soldier. You are not a soldier now. Why did you defend this off-worlder you hardly
knew?”
Milo glanced at Gaunt briefly. “The Elector of Tanith, whose household I served as musician and attendant,
ordered me to stay with the commissar and see to his needs. His needs at that point were mortal. He was being
attacked and had little chance of survival. I was doing as I had been ordered.”
She sat back, drumming her fingers on her knees. “It interests me, Milo, that you have not yet asked why this
interrogation is happening. Most brought before me usually express outrage and protest innocence, wondering why
this should be happening to them. But you do not. In my experience, the guilty always know why they’re here and
seldom ask. Do you know why you’re here?”
“I can guess.”
Gaunt froze. Wrong answer, Brin, wrong answer…“Guess out loud,” she invited. “I hear you’re remarkably good
at guessing.”
Milo seemed to tremble. “I am considered by many to be a misfit. Some of the Tanith don’t like to have me around.
I am not like them.”
“Feth, Milo! I said answer honestly, but there’s honest and there’s this! Gaunt thought darkly. His heart raced.
What do you mean? How are you not like them?”
“I… I’m different. It makes them uneasy.”
“How are you different?” she asked, almost eager. Here it comes, thought Gaunt. “I’m not a soldier.”
“You’re… what?”
They’re all soldiers. “That’s why they’re here, that’s why they survived the fall of Tanith. They were all newfounded
Guards, mustered to leave Tanith anyway, and the commissar only evacuated them because of their worth to
the Emperor. But I’m not. I’m a civilian. I shouldn’t be here. I shouldn’t have survived. The Tanith see me and they
think ‘Why did that boy survive? Why is he here? If he’s here, why not my brother, my daughter, my father, my wife?’
“I represent a possibility of survival denied to them all.”
She was silent for a moment.
It was all Gaunt could do to stop himself smiling. Milo’s answer had been perfect, as had the way he had allowed
it to seem she was leading him into a trap. It made his response seem all the more honest.
Lilith got to her feet and crossed to Gaunt’s side. He could see the fierce annoyance in her face. She whispered,
“Have you briefed the boy? Coached him in good answers for just such an event?”
Gaunt shook his head. “No, and if I had, don’t you suppose such an admission might make it look as if I knew Milo
had something to hide?”
She hissed a curse and thought for a moment.
“Why this charade of questions?” Gaunt asked. “Why not just probe his mind? You have the gift, don’t you?”
She looked and him and nodded. “You know I do. But a good psyker, a dangerous psyker, can hide his power. The
questions are an effective method of opening up his guard and winkling out the truth. And if his mind is the seething
furnace we fear, I have no wish to touch it directly.”
She turned back, pacing around Milo’s throne, from behind him, she said. “Tell me about the game.”
“Game?”
“The game you and your Tanith friends play in the troop decks.”
She paced round in front of him and held out her right hand, palm down, balled in a fist. She turned it over and
opened it. A grain-louse sat in the palm, twitching and alive.
“This game.”
“Oh,” Milo said. “It’s a betting game. You bet on which hole the bug will come out.”
She put the bug on his knee and it made no effort to jump away. Milo looked down at it with fascination. Lilith
crossed to the side of the room and took something from a wall cupboard. The object was covered in a velvet cloth.
When she unveiled it, it was like a magician about to perform a conjuring trick. But not half as much as when Varl
did it.
She gave the rusty censer ball to Milo. “Open it. Put the bug inside.”
He obeyed.
“Now, Milo. This isn’t a game, is it? It’s a scam. It’s a trick the Tanith use to win cash from the other Guards. And
if it’s a scam, it needs a sting. It needs a foolproof method to make it a sure thing the Tanith will win. You’re the
sting, aren’t you? On demand, you can guess right… because that’s what you do, isn’t it? Your mind does the trick
and makes it a certainty.”
Milo shook his head. “It’s just a game…”
“I have it on good authority that it is not. If it’s a game, why do you play it with unsuspecting troops from other
regiments? By my own investigation, you and your friends have earned a small fortune from other men in these last
few days. More than you would expect to win if it was just chance.”
“Lucky, I gu — I suppose.”
“You cannot run a scam on such wide odds. How do you really ensure the bug emerges from the right hole?”
Brin lifted the censer. The bug ticked inside. “Okay… if it matters so much, I’ll show you. Pick a hole.”
“Sixteen,” she said, sitting down on the stool facing him, apparently eager.
“I say nine.” He set it down. The bug emerged from hole twenty.
“You win. You were closer.”
She shrugged.
He opened the censer and put the bug back inside. “That was round one. You’re more confident now. You’ll play
again. Pick.”
“Seven.”
“Twenty-five,” said Milo. They waited, and then the bug wriggled out of hole six and hopped across the carpet.
“Again you win. You’re feeling good now, aren’t you? Two wins. On the troop deck, you might have a pile of
coins now, and you might wager the lot. You put the bug in.”
She did so and handed the censer back to Milo.
“Pick?” he said.
“Nineteen. All my money and all the cash my comrades-in arms have on nineteen.” He smiled. “One,” he said. The
bug squirmed out of hole one.
“And so I take my huge winnings, look you in your open-mouthed face and say good night.” Milo sat back.
“A beautiful demonstration… and one that may have just incriminated you. How could you do that, to order, at just
the right moment, unless your mind knew in advance which way the bug was going?”
Milo tapped his head. “You’re so sure it’s my mind, aren’t you, ma’am? So sure it’s the twisted workings I’ve got
up here… You think I’m psyker, don’t you?”
Her expression was icy. “Show me an alternative.”
He tapped his jacket pocket. “It’s not up there, it’s down here.”
“Explain.”
“At the start of each game, we reach into our pockets for the next wager. Let you place the bug and so on, but I’m
the last to handle the censer. The bugs love sugar dust. There’s some in the seam of my pocket. I wipe my finger in it
as I take out my money and then wipe that finger around the hole I want as I place the censer down. The dust’s
invisible on that rusty surface of course. But the scam is, I always know which hole it’s going to come out of. I
choose every time: the first few rounds to let you win, and then when you’re confident you’ve got me on the ropes
and start wagering everything, I play to win.”
Lilith got up smartly, crushing the bug underfoot with a deliberate heel. It left a brown stain on one beak of the
Imperial crest. She turned to Gaunt.
“Get him out of here. I will report to Bulledin and Sturm. This matter is closed.”
Gaunt nodded and led Milo to the doorway.
“Commissar!” she called out after them. “He might not be a witch, but if I were you I’d think twice about having a
devious and underhand little cheat like him anywhere near me.”
“I’ll take that under advisement, Inquisitor Lilith,” Gaunt replied and they left.
They walked back together through the hallways of the hexathedral. Night cycle was coming to an end, and dawn
prayers and offerings were being made in the echoing chapels and chambers around. Incense and plainsong filled the
air.“
Well done. I’m sorry you had to go through that.”
“You thought she’d get me, didn’t you?” Milo asked.
“I’ve never doubted the goodness or honesty in you, Brin, but I’ve always been uneasy about your knack of
anticipating things ahead of time. I always feared that someone would take exception to it and that you would land us
all in trouble.”
“You’d have shot me though, right?”
Gaunt stopped in his tracks. “Shot you?”
“If I’d let you down and landed the Ghosts in trouble. If I’d been… what she thought I was.”
“Oh.” They walked on. “Yes, I would. I would have had to.”
Milo shrugged.
“That’s what I thought you’d say,” he murmured.
ELEVEN
SOME DARK & SECRET PURPOSE
Gaunt woke, and remembered that he had been dreaming of Tanith. That wasn’t unusual in itself; the visions of the
fall of that world stalked his dreams regularly. But this time, for the first time, it seemed to him that he had been
dreaming about the world as it had been: alive, flourishing, thriving.
The dream disquieted him, and he would have dwelt on it, had there been time. But then he realised that an urgent
commotion had roused him. Outside, the pre-dawn gloom of Monthax was riven with shouts and alarms and the
distant, eager sounds of warfare. Someone was hammering on the door of the command centre. Gaunt could hear
Milo’s insistent voice.
He pulled on his boots and went outside, the cool morning air stiffening the night-sweat soaking his tight
undershirt and breeches. He blinked at the cold glare, batting aside a persistent insect, as he half-listened to Milo’s
hasty reports, half-read the vox-caster print-outs and data-slates the boy handed him. Gaunt’s eyes looked westward.
Pink and amber flashes under-lit the low night clouds to the west, like a false dawn, every now and then punctured
by the brief, trailing white star of a flarecharge, or the brighter, whiter flashes of some powerful energy support
weapon.
Gaunt didn’t need Milo or the printed communiqués to know that the major offensive had begun at last. The enemy
was moving, in force.
He ordered the platoon leaders to ready their men — though most had begun to do so already —and summoned the
senior officers for a tactical meeting in the command centre. He sent Milo away in search of his cap and jacket, and
his weapons.
In under ten minutes, Corbec brought Rawne, Lerod, Mkoll, Varl and the other seniors to the centre, to find Gaunt,
now dressed, spreading out the communiqués on the camp table. There were no preliminaries.
“Orbital reconnaissance and forward scouting has shown a massed, singular column of Chaos moving through the
territory to the west.”
“Objective?” Corbec asked.
Gaunt shrugged. It was a disarming gesture from one usually so confident. “Unclear, colonel. We’ve been
expecting a major attack for days, but this doesn’t seem to focus any strength on our positions at all. Early reports
show the enemy have cm through — well, destroyed, in fact — a battalion-strength force of Kaylen Lancers. But I
have a hunch that’s only because the lancers were in the way. It’s as if our enemy has another objective, one they’re
determined to achieve. One we don’t know about.”
Mkoll was eyeing the charts carefully. He’d scouted and mapped the area in question thoroughly during the
previous week. His sharp tactical mind saw no obvious purpose to the assault either. He said as much.
“Could their intelligence be wrong?” Varl asked. “Maybe they’ve made their play at positions they think we hold.”
“I doubt that,” Mkoll answered. “They’ve seemed well informed up to now. Still, it’s a possibility. They’ve
committed a huge portion of their strength to a mistake if that’s true.”
“If it’s a mistake, we’ll use it. If they have some dark and secret purpose, well, we’ll do ourselves no favours by
waiting to find out what it is.” Gaunt paused and scratched his chin thought fully.
“Besides,” he said, “our orders are clear. General Thoth is sending us in, as soon as we’re ready, on orders from
Lord Militant General Bulledin himself. The Tanith will form one arm of a counter assault. Upwards of sixty
thousand men from various regiments are to be deployed against the enemy. Because of the peculiar, not to say
perplexing orientation of their advance, we’ll catch them side on. The Ghosts will cover a salient about nine
kilometres long.” Gaunt indicated their area of the new front on the chart, marking little runic symbols on the glass
plate with his wax pencil. “I don’t want to sound over-confident, but if they’ve presented laterally to us by mistake,
or if they’re driving towards something else, we should be able to do a lot of damage to their flank. Thoth has
demanded a main force assault, what the beloved and devout Chapterhouses like to call a meat-grinder. Rip into
them along the flank and try, if nothing else, to break their column and isolate parts of it.”
“Begging your pardon, commissar,” Rawne’s sibilant tones whispered through the centre’s close humidity like a
cold draught. “The Tanith aren’t heavy troops. Main force, without playing to our strengths? feth, that’ll get us all
killed.”
“Correct, major.” Gaunt fixed the man with a tight stare. “Thoth has given the regimental commanders some
discretion. Let’s remember the depth of ground cover and jungle out there. The Ghosts can still use their stealth and
cunning to get close, get in amongst them if need be. I’ll not send you in en masse. The Ghosts will deploy in platoon
sections, small scattered units designed to approach the foe unseen through the glades. I think that way we will give
as good an account of ourselves as any massed charged of armoured infantry.”
The briefing was over, save to agree platoon order and position. The officers filed out.
Gaunt stopped Mkoll. “This notion they’ve made a mistake: you don’t hold with it?”
“I gave my reasons, sir,” Mkoll said. “It’s true, these jungles are dense and confusing, and we can use that. But I
don’t believe they’ve made a mistake, no, sir. I think they’re after something.”
“What?”
“I wouldn’t like to guess,” Mkoll said, but he gestured down at the chart. Just off centre in the middle of the area
mapped out as the new front, Gaunt saw what he was pointing to. A mark on the map representing the estimated
position of the prehuman ruins Mkoll had found while scouting just a few days before.
“I never did get a look at that, first hand. I… couldn’t find it again.”
“What? Say that again?”
Mkoll shrugged. “I saw it from a distance on patrol — that’s when I reported it to you. But since then, I’ve been
unable to relocate it. The men think I’m slipping.”
“But you think…” Gaunt let the silence and Mkoll’s expression finish the sentence.
Gaunt began to strap on his holster belt. “When we get in there, prioritise getting a good assessment of that ruin.
Find it again, priority. Keep this between us. Report it back to me directly.”
“Understood, colonel-commissar. To be frank, it’s an honour thing now. I know I saw it.”
“I believe you,” Gaunt said. “Feth, I trust your senses more than my own. Let’s move. Let’s go and do what they
sent us here to do.”
The stone walls were lime quartz, smooth, perfectly finished, lambent. They enclosed the Inner Place like walls of
water, like a section cut through the deepest ocean. As if some sublime power had cut the waters open and set aside
a dry, dark place for him to walk in, unmolested by the contained pressure of the flood.
He was old, but not so old that such an idea couldn’t touch him with the feeling of older myth. It warmed his dying
bones somehow. Not a thrill as such, but a powerful reassurance. To be in tune with such an ancestral legend.
The Inner Place was silent, except for the distant chiming of a prayer bell. And beyond that, a muffled clamour, far
away, like an eternally restless god, or the rumble of a deep, primeval star.
With long, fragile fingers, freed from the mesh-armoured glove which swung from his wrist-guard by its leather
loop and the energy coupler, the Old One traced the gold symbols inscribed on the green stone of the lower walls.
He closed his real eyes, dry rheumy lids shutting tight like walnut shells, and the auto-sensitive iris shutters of his
helmet optics closed in synch.
Another old tale remembered itself to him. Back, before the stars were crossed, when his kind only knew one
world, and knew the star and the kindred worlds that revolved around it only through the astronomical lenses they
trained at the sky. Then, as the weight of years swung by, slow and heavy as the slide of continents, and their abilities
grew, they slowly learned of other stars, other worlds, a galaxy. And they realised they were not one and alone but
one amongst countless others. And those other lights beckoned and, as they were able to, they fled to them.
So it seemed now, an echo. The Old One had been alone for a long while, conscious only of the few lives that
orbited his in the Inner Place, the lives of his devoted kin. Then, in the outer blackness, other lights began to emerge
and reveal themselves to his mind. A few at first, then dozens, thousands, legions.
The Old One’s mind was a fearfully powerful apparatus. As hundreds of thousands of life-lights slowly appeared
and began to congregate on this place, it seemed to him as if whole constellations were forming and becoming real.
And so many of those life-lights were dark and foul.
Time was against him and his kind. He despised the urgency, because haste was one thing his long, careful life had
previously been free of. But now there was precious little time left. A heartbeat by his measuring. And he would
have to use every last pulse of it to achieve his purpose.
Already his mind had set things in motion. Already, he had shaken out his dreams and let his rich imagination
drape across the place like a cloak. Simple deceits, such as would normally beguile the lesser brains of other races,
had already been set in motion.
They would not be enough.
The Old One sighed. It had come to this. A sacrifice, one that he knew would one day punctuate his long life.
Perhaps it had been the very reason for his birth.
He was ready. At least it would, in its turn, make a new legend.
Under the thick, wet trees and creeper growth, Third platoon skirted the ditches and mud-banks of the glades, moving
ever nearer to the thunder-war in the west. Dawn was now on them and light lanced down through the canopy in
cold, stale beams.
Third platoon; Rawne’s. They’d had Larkin seconded to them from Corbec’s unit because Rawne’s sniper was
busy heaving his fever-ridden guts into a tin bucket in the infirmary. Blood-flies, and tiny biting insects that swirled
like dust, had begun to spread disease and infection through the ranks. Dorden had been braced for wounded, but
what he had got, suddenly in the last day and night, were the sick.
Milo was with Rawne’s platoon too. The boy wasn’t sure who hated his presence there most, Rawne or Milo
himself. Just before deployment, Gaunt had taken Milo to one side and instructed him to accompany the major’s
advance.
“If anyone’s going to benefit from your rousing pipes, it’s going to be the Third,” the commissar had said. “If any
section is going to break, it’s going to be them. I want you there to urge them on —or at least vox me if they falter.”
Milo would have refused but for the look in Gaunt’s eyes. This was a trust thing, a subtle command responsibility.
Gaunt was entrusting him to watch the Third from the inside. Besides, he had his lasgun now, and his shoulder pip,
and Rawne’s sniper wasn’t the only man in the Third to fall sick.
“Keep up!” Teygor hissed to Milo as they crept through the weeds. Milo nodded, biting back a curse. He knew he
was moving more swiftly and silently than many in Rawne’s platoon. He knew too that he had fastened his webbing
and applied his camo-paint better than any of them. Colm Corbec had taken time to teach him well.
But he also knew he wasn’t an outsider anymore, a boy piper, a mascot. He was a Ghost, and as such he would
obey the letter of his superiors. Even if they were dangerous, treacherous men.
With Rawne’s scout Logris in the vanguard, the ten men filed through the glades and thickets of the Monthax
jungle. Milo found himself behind Caffran, the only trooper in the platoon who he liked. Or trusted.
Rawne paused them in a basin of weed and silt-muck which stank of ripe vegetation while Logris and Teygor
edged ahead. Tiny flies swirled like dust over the soup.
Caffran, his face striped with camo-paint, turned to Milo and gently adjusted the straps of the lad’s weapon, like a
big brother looking after a younger sibling.
“You’ve seen action, though, haven’t you?” Caffran whispered. “This is nothing new.”
Milo shrugged. “Yes, but not like this. Not as a trooper.”
Caffran smiled. “You’ll be fine.”
Across the silky water, Larkin watched them from his position curled into the root network of a mangrove. He
knew that Caffran and the piper boy had never been friends before now. He had heard Caffran talk of it. Though little
more than two years separated them, Caffran felt uneasy around the lad, because he reminded him too much of home.
Now that seemed to be forgotten and Larkin was glad. It seemed having Milo in his company had given Caffran
purpose. A novice, a little brother, someone junior to the youngest Ghost that Caffran could take care of.
Caffran felt it too. He no longer despised Brin Milo. Trooper Milo was one of them now. It was like… it was like
they were back home. Caffran couldn’t understand why he had shunned the boy so. They were all in this together. All
Tanith, after all. And besides, if Gaunt had seen fit to protect Milo all this time, Caffran was damned if anything
would happen to the boy.
Rawne waited at the ditch edge for Logris and Teygor. His eyes were fierce diamonds of white with hard, dark
centres, flashing from the band of camo-paint across his face. There was something terribly familiar about their
situation. He could feel it in his marrow. Soon there would be killing.
Spoonbills flapped by. Mkoll turned to Domor and slung his weapon.
“Sir?” Domor asked quietly.
“Take them forward, Domor,” Mkoll said.
“Me?”
“You’re up to it?”
Domor shrugged a “yes”, the focussing rings of his bionic eyes whirring as they tried to manufacture the quizzical
expression his real eyes would have wanted.
“I need to move ahead. Scout. I can only do that alone. You bring the Ninth up after me.”
“But—”
“Gaunt won’t mind. I’ve spoken to him.” Mkoll tapped the ear-piece of his micro-bead intercom twice and softly
told the rest of his platoon that Domor was now in charge, “follow him like you would me,” he urged them.
He looked back at Domor. “This is important. It may be the life or death of us. Okay?”
Domor nodded. “For Tanith.”
“For Tanith, like it’s still alive.”
Mkoll was gone an instant later, vanishing into the brooding, puffy, waterlogged vegetation like a rumour.
“Form on me and renew advance,” Domor whispered into his bead, and Ninth platoon formed and renewed.
Under the shade of great, oil-sweet trees, Corbec’s platoon, the Second, moved into the mire and the glades. The
colonel missed Larkin, but his squad already had the crack-shot Merrt, so it would have been churlish to complain.
Feth, Corbec was thinking, all this time driven mad by Larks’ babbling and scaremongering, and now I actually
wish he was here.
Ahead, the glades widened into a lagoon. The still water was coated with russet weed, and black, rotten wood
limbs and roots poked up out of it. Corbec motioned the Second on behind him, the thigh-deep water leaving a greasy
film on his fatigues. He raised his gun higher.
“Up there!” Merrt breathed through the intercom. Along the far end of the lagoon, Corbec could see shapes:
moving figures.
“Ours?” Merrt asked.
“Only Varl could be dumb enough to bring his platoon in front of ours, and he’s on the eastern limit. No. Let’s go.”
Corbec raised his gun to firing position, heard nine other safeties hum off. “For Tanith! For the Emperor! For
us!” he bellowed.
Las-fire volleyed across the water of the lagoon and figures at the far end fell and started. Some dropped into the
water, face down; others knelt for cover in the tree roots of the bank and returned fire. Laser shots echoed and
returned across the water course. The lowest bolts cut furrows as they flew across the water. Others steamed as they
hit the liquid or exploded sodden, decomposing bark.
Others hit flesh, or cut through armour, and figures tumbled down the far bank, sliding into the water or being
arrested by root systems. Merrt made three priceless head shots before a stray return took him in the mouth and he
dropped, face down and gurgling, into the ooze of the lagoon.
Corbec bellowed into his vox-bead that contact had been made and that he was engaging. Then he set his lasgun
for full auto-fire and ploughed into the water, his finger clenching the trigger.
One for Merrt. Two. Three. Four. Not enough. Not even half enough.
“Second platoon has engaged!” Comms-Officer Raglon reported quickly to Gaunt.
“Ahead now!” Gaunt ordered, urging the men of First forward through the shin-deep water along the glade bed.
His chainsword was in his hand and purring. They could hear the close shooting, harsher and more immediate than
the distant thunder of the mysterious war they were approaching: Corbec’s platoon, fighting and firing. But the source
was unspecified, remote. Gaunt damned the thickness and false echoes of the glades. Why was this place so
impossibly confused?
Las-fire spat across the glades at the First platoon. Lowen fell, cut through and smouldering.
Raglon went down too, a glancing burn to his cheek. Gaunt hauled the vox-caster man to his feet and threw him
into cover behind a thick root branch.
“All right?”
“I’ll live,” returned the comms-officer, dabbing the bloody, scorched weal along the side of his face with a
medicine swab.
The enemy fire was too heavy to charge against. Gaunt fell his platoon into cover and they began to return fire
with drilled, careful precision. They loosed their las-rounds down the funnel of the glade, and the salvos that came
back at them were loose and unfocused. Gaunt could see the position of the enemy from their muzzle flashes. They
were badly placed and poorly spaced.
He ordered his men up, searching for a rousing command. None came but for: “First platoon… like you’re the
First and Only! Kill them!”
It would do. It would do.
Third platoon froze, half at a hand gesture from Rawne, half at the sudden sounds of fighting from elsewhere in the
glades. They settled in low, in the dark green shadows of the canopy, white eyes staring up from dark camo-paint at
every ripple of sound. Feygor wiped a trickle of sweat off his cheek. Larkin tracked around with his custom rifle,
hunting the trees around them with his nightscope. Wheln chewed at his lower lip, eyes darting. Caffran was poised
like a statue, gun ready.
“To the left,” Rawne hissed, indicating with a finger, “fighting there. No further than two hundred metres.”
Just behind him, Milo jerked a thumb off to the right. “And to the right, sir. A little further off.” His voice was a
whisper.
Feygor was about to silence the impudence with a fist, but Rawne raised a hand and nodded, listening. “Sharp
ears, boy. He’s right. The echoes are confusing, but there is a second engagement.”
“All around us, then… What about our turn?” Feygor breathed.
Rawne could feel Feygor’s itching impatience. The waiting, the fething anticipation, was often harder than the
fighting itself.
“We’ll find our fight soon enough.” Rawne slid out his silver dagger — given to him by Gaunt, Emperor damn his
soul!—the blade dulled with fire-soot, and clipped it into the lugs under his lasgun’s muzzle. His men fixed their
own knives as bayonets in response.
“Let’s keep the quiet and the surprise as long as we have it,” Rawne told them, and raised them to move on.
There was the sound of water, drizzling. The spitting noise almost blocked out the muffled fighting elsewhere. But
not the distant heavy bombardment of the duelling armour.
Mkoll followed a lip of rocks, slick with black lichen, around the edge of a pool in deep shadow. A skein of water
fell from a mossy outcrop thirty metres above, frothing the plunge pool. It was as humid and dark as a summer night
in this dim place.
Mkoll heard movement, a skittering of rocks high above at the top of the falls. Cover was scant, so without
hesitation he slid off the lip of stone into the water, sinking down to his neck, his lasgun held up in one hand at ear
level, just above the surface. With fluid precision, he glided under the shadow of the rock, moving behind the
churning froth of the cataract.
Shadows moved along the top of the rock above him. Fifteen, perhaps twenty warriors. He caught their scent: the
spicy, foul reek of something barely human. He heard low, clipped voices crackle back and forth via helmet
intercoms, speaking a language that he was thankful he could not understand. Mkoll felt his guts vice involuntarily. It
wasn’t fear of the enemy, or of death; it was fear of what the enemy was. Their nature. Their abomination.
The water seemed glass-cold around him. His limbs were deadening. But hot sweat leaked down his face. Then
they were gone.
Mkoll waited a full two minutes until he was sure. Then he crawled up out of the water and padded off silently in
the direction from which his enemy had come.
Seventh platoon came out of a deep grove into sudden sunlight and even more sudden gunfire. Three of Sergeant
Lerod’s men were down before he had time to order form and counter. Enemy fire stripped the trees all around,
pulverising bark and foliage into sap mist and splinters. The enemy had at least two stub guns and a dozen lasweapons
in cover on the far side of the narrow creek.
Lerod bellowed orders in the whistling flashes of the exchange, moving backwards and firing from the hip on auto.
Two of his men had made good cover and were returning hard. Others fought for places with him. T’argin, the voxoperator,
was hit twice in the back and fell sideways, his twitching corpse held upright, like a puppet, in a drapery of
moss-creepers.
A las-round stung Lerod’s thigh. He knelt helplessly, then dropped to his belly in desperation, blasting up into the
trees. His wild fire hit something — a weapon power-pack, perhaps — and a seething sheet of flame rushed out of
the far creek bank, stripping and felling trees and tossing out two blackened bodies which cartwheeled in the air and
fell into the creek bed. Pin-pointing Lerod as the source of this little victory, the unseen stubbers traversed and sent
stitching lines of firepower down the earth trail where he sprawled.
He saw them in a split second: the twin lines of ferocious tracers etching their way across the loam to slice him
into the ground. There was nothing he could do… no time. He closed his eyes.
Lerod opened them again. By some miracle, both lines of fire had missed him, passing either side of his prone
form.
He began to laugh at the craziness of it and rolled into the cover of trees a few metres to the left, exhorting his
surviving company with renewed vigour to give back and give hard. He felt jubilant, like he had on the founding
fields below Tanith Magna, before the Toss. He had never thought he would have that feeling again.
With bitter resentment, Corbec pulled the Second back from the lagoon where they were stymied. They were
outgunned and partly circled. The Tanith fell back, quickly and silently into the trees, leaving tripwires and tube
rounds in their wake.
A quick vox-exchange brought the Second round alongside the first platoon and Gaunt himself, holding the line of
a wide creek.
“Thick as flies!” Corbec yelled to Gaunt as his men reinforced the first. “Big numbers of them, determined too!”
Gaunt nodded, directing his men forward a metre at a time trying to out-mark and topple the enemy possession of
the fat-bank.
Explosions crackled through the trees in the direction of Corbec’s retreat as the advancing foe tripped the first of
the mines. Gaunt cursed. This terrain was meant to give the Ghosts the advantage with their stealth skills, but the
enemy was everywhere, as if milling and confused. And though that meant they were not working to a cohesive plan,
it also meant the larger enemy force was splintered, unpredictable and all around them.
Raglon was firing from cover and Gaunt ducked in behind him, waving Corbec over. Corbec sprinted across the
open ground, his tunic and face splattered with pulverised leaf flecks and sap. He looked like the Old Man of the
Woods in the traditional least of Leaves, back home on Tanith, whe—
Gaunt froze, startled and confused. Back home on Tanith! What tricks was his mind playing now? He’d never
heard of any Feast of the Leaves, yet it had seemed to bob up from his memory as a truth. For a moment, he could
even smell the sugared nal-fruit as they roasted in their charcoal ovens.
“What’s up, sir?” Corbec asked, trying to squeeze his bulk into the scant cover as las-rounds whipped around
them.
Gaunt shook his head. “Nothing,” he pulled his data-slate from the pocket of his leather coat and plugged the short
lead into the socket at the base of the vox-link on Raglon’s back. Then he tapped his clearance into the small board
of rune-marked keys, and main battle-data began to display on his slate, direct from General Thoth’s Leviathan
command base.
Gaunt selected an overall tactical view so he and Corbec could take in the state of the battle.
The Tanith were shown as a thin, vulnerable line, static and held along the main watercourse. To either side of
them, heavier regiments and armoured units were making greater headway, but these too were slow and foundering.
The Volpone were pushing from the east, with massive artillery support, but the Trynai Sixth and Sixteenth were
pinned down and slowly being slaughtered.
“Feth, but it’s bad…” Corbec muttered. “This whole push is grinding to a halt.”
“We’ll have to see if we can improve matters,” Gaunt returned, solemn and occupied. He wound the dial to bring
up a specific display of the Ghosts’ struggling advance. All of the platoons were essentially halted and most engaged
in heavy fire. Lerod’s unit was taking the brunt of it. Rawne’s, Gaunt noticed, had so far failed to engage.
“Have they got the luck?” Corbec asked.
“Or are they not trying?” Gaunt said aloud.
The Third edged on, passing a deep hidden pool with a glittering waterfall that fell from a crop of mossy rock.
Rawne split his platoon and moved them up either side of the water.
Feygor stooped to pick up something and showed it to the major. It was a cell from a lasgun, but not Imperial
issue.
“They’ve been through here.”
“And we’ve missed them!” Rawne cursed. “Teth take this bastard jungle! We’re in amongst them and we can’t see
them!”
On the far side of the pool, Milo paused and turned to Caffran. “Smell that?” he whispered.
Caffran frowned. “Mud? Filthy water? Pollen?”
“This jungle doesn’t smell like it did before. I can almost smell… nal-wood.” Milo rubbed his own nose, as if he
distrusted it.
Caffran was about to laugh, but then realised that he smelled it too. It was astonishing, almost overwhelming in its
nostalgia. The air indeed smelt of the rich conifers of Tanith. Now he thought about it, the trees and foliage around
them seemed darker, much more like the wet-land forests of his lost home-world. Nothing like the stinking, seething
jungle they had known since arriving on Monthax.
“This is crazy,” he said, reaching out and touching one of the familiar trees. Milo nodded. It was crazy — and
scary too.
From the cover of some low, flowering bushes, busy with insects, Mkoll could see a clearing ahead. There had been
brief, heavy fighting there not more than two hours before. The earth was churned up, trees burned back and
splintered. Bodies smouldered on the ground.
He crept forward to look. The dead were Chaos soldiery heavily armed and armoured in quilted red fatigues and
bare steel armoured sections. Their helmets were inscribed with such horrific symbols and figures he began to dryheave
until he looked away.
Others had fallen here too, but their bodies had been removed. No Imperial unit had got this far in. There was
another force at play on Monthax. Mkoll looked at the wounds on the fallen. Here and there, a helmet or metal
breast-plate had been punctured, not by an energy round or explosive shell, but by something sharp and clean which
had punched right through composite metal. In a tree stump behind one corpse, Mkoll found a missile embedded, a
wickedly sharp metal star with razor-edged points.
With a long, slow sigh that wheezed out of his helmet’s mouthpiece, the Old One sat back on the stone seat at the
centre of the Inner Place.
Like a spider at the heart of a complex web, he reached out mentally and tested the strands of his net of deceit, the
cloak of confusion he had spread out around him, leagues in every direction. It was serving its purpose for now. He
studied the minds caught in his net: so very many of them cruel and brutish and overflowing with the poison of
Chaos. And the others, the brief human sparks. The Imperials had engaged too, he realised, coming in to try their
strength against the forces of Chaos as they moved. He saw bloody fighting. He saw primitive courage. Humans
always surprised him that way. Such little life-spans, so furiously exhausted. Their valour would be almost
admirable if it wasn’t so futile.
Yet perhaps he could use that. To make allies was out of the question, but he could use all the time he could buy,
and these determined Imperial humans, with their relentless urge to fight and win, could help him in that.
It was past time for him to play his last hand. He would work the humans, for what little good they could do, into
that gambit. A final check now.
Muon Nol, Dire Avenger, master of the bodyguard, entered the Inner Place at the Old One’s mental summons. He
held his great white-crested helm under one arm, the red plume crest perfect and trim, and his opalescent blue
armour glittered with flecks of gold, like the heart of a cooling star. The braided tassels of his cape hung down to his
waist, shrouding the weapons cinched tight to his back. His noble, ancient eyes studied the Old One. There was
fatigue in his long, solemn face.
“Muon Nol: how goes the work?”
“The Way is open, lord.”
“And it must be closed. How much longer?”
Muon Nol looked down at the smooth stone floor where the shimmer of his blue armoured form was reflected.
“All but the bodyguard have departed, lord. The Closing of the Way has now begun. It will be a little time yet before
we are finished.”
“A little time for us, perhaps, Muon Nol. Not for the enemy. More than long enough for them, I fear. There is no
time for proper closure now. We must sever.”
“Lord!”
The Old One held up his hand, the one that was bare of a glove. The sight of those ancient fingers, almost
translucent with wasting age, silenced Muon Nol’s protests.
“It is not the way we wished it, Muon Nol. But it is all we can do now. Dolthe must be protected. I will now do as
I told you and commit my final reserves to the last delaying tactics.”
Muon Nol dropped to his knees before the seated figure and lowered his head. “But that it should come to this,
Lord Eon Kull!”
Eon Kull, the Old One, sat back with a half-smile. “I am this Way, Muon Nol. It has been my charge and duty all
these measures of time. It and I are as one. If it must be shut now forever — and it must — it is only right that the
book of my life shuts with it. It is appropriate and necessary. I do not see it as a failure or a loss. Neither should you.
Lord Eon Kull closes his Way for the last time, for all time. Lord Eon Kull will pass away with it.”
Muon Nol raised his head. Were those tears in his dark eyes? Eon Kull considered that perhaps tears from his
most faithful warrior were not out of place.
“Leave me now. Tell your guard to brace themselves for the mind-trauma. I will call you again when it is done, so
that we may say farewell.”
The master of the bodyguard rose and began to turn.
“Muon Nol?”
“Lord?”
Eon Kull, the Old One, lifted his weapon from the rim of the stone seat. The dim light shone from the long, smooth
barrel of the buanna, and twinkled on the inlay at the grip and shoulder guard, Uliowye, the Kiss of Sharp Stars. The
weapon of a champion, precious and celebrated. In Eon Kull’s hands, it had won fabulous victories for Dolthe.
“Take this. Stand your place when the time comes and use it well.”
“Uliowye… I cannot, lord! She has always been yours!”
“Then she is mine to give, Muon Nol! Uliowye will not be happy to sleep through this great passing. She must kiss
the foe at least once more.”
Muon Nol took the old shrieker cannon reverently. “She will not go silently, high lord. You do me a great honour.”
Eon Kull nodded and said no more, shushing Muon Nol away and out of the Inner Place. The Old One sat for a
while longer, thinking of nothing but the silence to come. Then his mind woke again to the noisy hosts outside the
walls, the minds milling and fighting and killing and dying in the deep jungle of Monthax around him.
Eon Kull rose and stepped down off the throne. He knelt on the cool floor of the Inner Place and unclasped the
decorated purse at his belt. The contents clacked together. Eon Kull the warlock spilled them out onto the flagstones.
Slivers of bone, each inscribed with a rune of power. Though this was a dim place, they shone like ice in the noon
sun and he observed their pattern. Slowly, with his bare fingers, he slid them around, forming intricate conjunctions,
pairing some slivers, placing other runes alone or in small piles. The arrangement was quite precise.
Eon Kull tensed as he felt the raw moaning of the warp. The psycho-reactive runes gave him access to the
unbridled power of the warp-spaces, acting as keys to open the locks of his powerful mind to the warp outside.
He started to draw and channel the force of the warp through the rune keys. They began to glow more brilliantly
now, humming with energy. His mind began to struggle. He had never attempted to channel such levels of power
before.
No, that wasn’t true. In his youth, as he began upon the Witch Path, he had performed great feats, and then with
fewer runes. He had added to his knowledge and technique over the centuries, but he was not young anymore. It took
more out of him now to harness the power. In sympathy, the spirit stones inset on his rune-armour flickered, as did
dozens of others ranged at the side of his throne. Waking from their eternal slumber at his bidding, the souls of other
seers and warlocks, long flesh-dead, conjoined with him to guide him and strengthen his power.
A few of the older and more surly spirits chided him for attempting so great a deed. Others aided him
unequivocally, and soothed the complaints of their fellow spirits. The cause was simple and pure: Dolthe. Dolthe
must persist, and Eon Kull was right to try the limit of his powers to make it so.
A noise from behind almost distracted him. But it was Fuehain Falchior, tasting battle, twitching in her wraithbone
rack.
“Be still, witchblade,” Hon Kull murmured and turned his full attention back to the deed.
Now the runes glowed more brightly still. Some quivered on the floor, rattling as if disturbed by seismic shaking.
The spirit stones flickered and pulsed. Lon Kull looked into the warp and the warp poured into him. He germinated
power, a racing, fecund rhythm.
His bare hand clasped like a claw. Veins stood out on his wrist. Now the pain welled inside him. Watery blood
dribbled from his nose.
Despite the pain, he laughed to himself. No matter how strange, how bittersweet, there would be victory in this.
Or at least, for Dolthe and his kind, he hoped that there would.
The sky over that section of the Monthax glade-wilderness buckled and exploded. Blinding forks of lightning blinked
downwards in a hundred places out of a heaven that had previously been clear and sultry blue. Stands of trees
exploded under the electrical hammerblows. Several armoured vehicles in the Imperial vanguard were struck and
destroyed. A Volpone Hellhound, struck by ball-lightning, went up like a torch as its huge fuel reserves were touched
off. At another place, on a creek bed, fourteen basilisk self-propelled guns, their long barrels raised to the sky ready
for bombardment, became lighting conductors. Electrocuted, the gun-crews danced and jerked, or melted onto the
white-hot hulls for ten seconds before the combined munitions blew a square kilometre of the jungle into the sky in a
column of superheated energy and debris.
The blast shook the hulking, hundred metre-high Imperial command Leviathan stationed sixteen kilometres back
and threw the bridge crew to the deck. General Thoth leapt up as his multiple screens and main holographic display
fizzled and went out. He yelled frantic orders into the darkness.
Rain sheeted down on top of the lightning, walls of cold, unseasonable downpour which demolished the ripe
foliage of the upper tree cover and the moss-vines, and shredded trunks back to the heartwood. Drenched, the
Imperial forces fell back blind into watercourses suddenly swollen by rich, red tides of floodwater, the battle
forgotten.
Varl’s platoon fell into cover under rocks, praying and gasping in the icy rain. Vox-lines were broken and no one
could see more than a metre in any direction.
Pear tightened its grip on the Imperium forces. The enemy were lost in the storm all along the war-front. Chaos
artillery persisted in firing, but their blasts and recoils seemed pathetic next to the elemental commotion. Guardsmen
spoke of a Chaos-summoned witch-storm.
Lerod’s platoon, what was left of it, ran back through the drumming rain, blind and almost grateful for the chance
to break the impasse.
Half of Domor’s platoon were carried away down a flash-flooding waterway. Two drowned.
Then, amidst the rain, came hail like fists. This fell on the west, breaking bones and killing nineteen men outright
in the Volpone phalanx. The hail was so hard it dented tank armour.
Suddenly up to their knees in rushing, liquid mud, first and Second platoons of the Tanith backed from the
breaching lagoon, Gaunt leading the way, gripping saplings and vines to stay upright. Corbec chased the stragglers,
half-carrying Trooper Melk who had lost a knee.
“What in the name of Feth is this?” Gaunt screamed into the rain.
No one had an answer. Witchery, they all thought.
Typhoon-force winds surged in along the edges of the storm. Imperial air-cover was pulled out and grounded, but
not before two Marauders had been torn out of the air and smashed. One, its stabilisers gone and its thrusters
screaming, managed to turn its death into a pyrrhic victory by taking out a line of Chaos tanks gummed down in a
clearing which had abruptly become a lake. The vast, multiple explosions were lost in the roar of the storm.
Caught in a sudden flash flood, stunned by the force of the hail and rain, Mkoll clung on to a nearly uprooted
mangrove to stop himself being carried off. Blinking water from his eyes, he saw his lasgun ride away in the leafchoked
froth. He felt the loss acutely. He had been so careful and protective of that simple, standard-issue gun. There
was none better kept, better cared for, or cleaner in the Tanith regiment. Now it spun away from him, ruined,
swamped. But he had his life still — for as long as the roots would hold.
Rawne pushed Third platoon forward through the deluge. Their hair and uniforms were plastered to their pale
skins. Some edifice rose ahead, a structure of stone raised from fashioned blocks. To Rawne, it seemed almost
familiar. His urgent commands were lost in the hurricane winds.
A snapped off branch whickered through the gale and the near-horizontal downpour and struck Trooper Logris in
the throat. Milo tried to help him but it was too late. His neck was broken and his head lolled around the wrong way.
Already, his crumpled body was being sucked down into the swelling mud by the hideous rain.
Caffran grabbed Milo and dragged him through the storm of wind and rain and flurrying leaves into the cover of
the stone ruin. Rawne yanked them in to join the other members of his platoon: Feygor, Cown, Wheln, Mkendrik,
Larkin, Cheffers. But Cheffers was dead. There was no sign of injury on him until Cown spotted the blood oozing
from a slit in his throat. Something protruded from it. It was a leaf. Carried point-first by the stabbing wind, the stiff
leaf had punctured Cheffers’ throat and cut his windpipe. Horrified, with the wind and rain wailing against the stone
block at their backs, they saw how their tunics and cloaks had been torn and sliced by other such leaf-missiles.
“What kind of storm is this?” Caffran howled over the roar. “And where the feth did it come from so suddenly?”
Feygor bawled.
Rawne didn’t know. Everything had been going smoothly until then. The mustering on the founding Fields. The
preparation for disembarkment. And now a storm like nothing he’d seen before had fallen on Tanith Magna.
“Bet your lives it’s the work of the enemy!” he yelled to his men. “A surprise attack to take Tanith from us! Ready
your weapons!”
Every one of them responded, checking their lasguns.
Except Milo. “Major— what did you just say?”
Rawne looked down at the boy. “I know it’s your first taste of battle, worm, but try to think like a trooper! You
have only just mustered here, wet behind the ears from the Magna province farms, but you’re in for a fight!”
Milo blinked. The roar of the storm just outside the stone blocks sheltering them seemed to have left him
concussed. Rawne and the others had gone mad. This wasn’t Tanith! They were acting like it was the homeworld
and—
He stopped. The stone wall in front of him was a solid section of Tanith basalt, mined from the quarries at Pryze
Junction. The crest of the Elector was inscribed into it. He knew this place… a side corridor just off the main
western fortification of the capital city.
But—
For a moment, Milo faltered. He could remember something. A dying world, a small brotherhood of survivors…
ghosts… playing the pipes to urge them on.
Just a dream. Just a bad dream, he realised. They were mustering at the Foundation of the Tanith regiments and
Chaos had attacked their homeworld. They had no choice. Stand and fight, or die. And if they died, Tanith would die
with them.
The storm, a spinning electrical disk of clouded black fury sixty kilometres in diameter, held its position unerringly
above the battle front. Its power and force were so great, even the mighty cogitators of the hexathedral Sanctity, high
in orbit, couldn’t compute its magnitude or penetrate the dome of blistering interference it created. Any Imperial
forces that still had a measure of mobility, those that had not been swept away or mired, began to pull back to their
lines, making what headway they could in the appalling conditions. Many units, most of them armour and heavy
fighting vehicles, were cut off or swamped, helpless and detached from the main retreat.
No one, not even General Thoth’s chief tacticians, could begin to guess the state, response or position of the foe
they were meant to be engaging. Had they broken too? Were they just as lost, or had all of them been obliterated by
the hurricane? Or was this their doing?
Many of the Imperial veterans and officers had seen psychic storms before, a favoured terror-weapon of the
Chaotic foe. But this was not the same. There was no pestilential quality to it, no reek of unholy filth, no heaviness in
the air that made skin crawl and bowels churn and minds spin into waking nightmares.
Just titanic fury. Almost pure, elemental power. A null. Yet, if they could read it, the warp was there. The
unmistakable flavour of the warp.
Inquisitor Lilith had no doubts at all. Her attuned senses had no trouble in detecting the cold psyker power
galvanising the deluge. Indeed, it was all she could do to shut it out and stop it howling and screaming through her
mind. The rumours of pysker-witchery said to haunt this world were true, but this witchery had a power and clarity
like none she had ever felt.
She strode through the downpour in a long cape of dripping black leather, her cowl pulled up. She stared fixedly
at the storm which boiled in the sky two leagues or so from her position. Her honour guard escort marched in her
train. She could feel their nervousness and unwillingness to proceed into an area all other right-minded Guard units
were fleeing from. But Lord Militant General Bulledin had appointed them to serve Lilith as she prosecuted this
event, and they feared the Lord Militant and the inquisitor more than any storm.
The escort was thirty troopers from the Royal Volpone 50th, the Bluebloods. They wore the grey and gold body
armour and low-brimmed bowl helmets of the Volpone, with wet-weather oilskins draped lankly over their torsos.
Their shoulders and arms were massive with segmented carapace armour, and they were each armed with a mattblack
hellgun fresh from the weapon shops of Leipaldo. Each man had a bright indigo Imperial Eagle stud pinned
into his armaplas collar section, marking them all as from the Volpone Tenth Brigade, the elite veteran force. Only
the best of the best for an Imperial inquisitor. With them came a shrouded astropath, one of Lilith’s own staff. He
jerked and staggered at every twitch of the storm, and was given a wide berth by the Volpone soldiers.
The detail commander, Major Gilbear, fell in step with the inquisitor. His face was set grimly, but he projected a
sickening sense of pompous pride at taking this duty. Lilith could barely shut that out either.
“Can you outline our purpose and approach, my lady inquisitor?” Gilbear asked, using the formal aristocratic
dialect of the highest Imperial courts. It was partly to impress her, Lilith knew, and partly to establish his own selfimportance.
The huge Volpone clearly wanted to show he believed himself to be more than a common soldier. As if
they were… equals…
“I’ll let you know when I decide, major,” she replied in the blunt and crude low-Gothic of the common soldiery.
An insult, she knew, but one that might make him quit his airs and graces. She hadn’t time to be bothered with him
right now.
He nodded curtly, and she smiled at the throb of bitten-down anger he radiated.
They crossed a foaming waterbed, shallow, but fast running, where a dozen Chimeras of the Roane Deepers were
struggling to dig themselves out. Agitated, spooked troopers milled around, shouting, cursing and heaving on stripped
tree trunks to lever out clogged track units. Tine drizzle from the edge of the storm whipped across them, creating a
billion impact ripples in the water.
On the far side, the inquisitor’s party followed the bank in towards the edge of the storm. There was debris in the
spraying water here: shreds of equipment, helmets, pieces of foliage, drowned bodies, all swirling downstream in
the flood.
Inquisitor Lilith called a halt in a clearing where vast deciduous trees had been reduced to blackened columns by
lightning strikes. A raft of wood pulp and leaves sloshed and ebbed over the swamped ground. She pulled out her
data-slate and reviewed it. It showed the positions of all the Imperial forces, each individual unit, as last recorded
before the storm came down. A complex data-mosaic of thousands of individual components, one that would take a
trained tactician hours to assess. But she had already located the one element which interested her: the Third platoon
of the First-and-Only Tanith.
Mkoll made it to higher ground, the rain and wind pelting him. The sky was black, and it was as dark as night, but his
night-vision couldn’t adjust because of the frequent blinding flashes of lightning which strobed across him. He was
all but deaf with the near-constant thunder. In places, mud-slides had brought parts of the high ground slope down,
and more than once he was almost carried off his feet as thick, slimy folds of mud came loose and oozed away down
the incline. He glimpsed something in the next lightning flash that made him stop in his tracks, and he wailed for the
next searing discharge to confirm what he had seen.
The ruin. The ruin he had glimpsed on patrol before and had spent so long trying to find once more. He wouldn’t
lose it again. Mkoll stayed put and waited through the next three or four flashes, memorising the elements of the
landscape, both near and far, as it was revealed to him in split-second snapshots.
In the last flash, he saw the movement too.
Enemy warriors, higher up the slope, stumbling across him in the deluge by chance. As the world went black
again, they fired his way, cracking red lines in the darkness and the rain. Mkoll slid down onto his knees in the mud,
trying to use the slope to give him as much cover as possible against the killers moving down the hill from above.
Another flash. They were closer. Six or more, most holding their weapons one-handed as they clung onto sagging
saplings and outcrops of rock to keep themselves upright as they came down the incline. In the darkness, more red
fire-bolts.
Mkoll pulled out his laspistol. He was blind, but the red flashes were a focus in the dark. He waited for more
shots, then fired directly at the source of the blasts.
Then he scrambled to his left so they couldn’t use the same trick on him. His precaution was wise. The muddy
ridge which had previously sheltered him was hit by four separate bursts of enemy fire. Boiled mud spattered up in
lazy splashes. The tumultuous rain washed the steam away immediately.
More lightning. This brief gift of sight revealed to Mkoll the huge shape of a Chaos soldier almost on top of him.
He’d either been trying to flank Mkoll’s last position or been brought down the slick, treacherous slope faster than
intended They had almost collided.
Mkoll swung up his laspistol and shot him through the chest, point blank, before he could react. The enemy, a
stinking dead-weight draped in loose chains and angular, rusty armour plates, slammed into Mkoll and flattened him
back into the ooze. Locked under the corpse, Mkoll began to slide back down the mud-slope. He fought to get out
from under the body and freed himself. Now he and the corpse slid down the hill more gently, head first, on their
backs, side to side.
Mkoll swung over onto his knees, slipping down again twice before he properly righted himself. He was coated
with mud and slime, though the slap of the rain washed it out of his eyes. He felt it had poured thickly into his ears
too, because he was truly deaf now. Or had the detonations of the thunder finally burst his eardrums? Gunfire chased
his way, hunting his last shot. He could see the red rips in the rain, but they were silent now. There was nothing but a
low, constant grumble in his ears.
He got down next to the corpse. There was no sign of its main weapon, but an antique laspistol was hooked into
its waistband. He pulled it out. It was longer, heavier and far more ornate than his simple, standard-pattern Guard
pistol. The pear-shaped hand-grip was wrapped in fine chain and leather cord, and grotesque symbols were inlayed
along the under-barrel furniture in pearl and silver. A yellow dot of light showed it was fully charged.
Blue light, harsh and electrical, shone over him. Phosphor flares, two first, then a third, trembled up into the
sheeting rain over the hillside. Mkoll’s eyes adjusted to the bright, flickering twilight. He could see the trees in stark
black relief, the solid, blurring veil of the rain. He could see the enemy, nine or more, scrambling down the bank
onto him, the closest twenty metres away.
And they could see him.
They opened fire. It was silent still, just that rumble like grinding teeth, but plumes of mud burst up from impacts
around him, and scythed through the bole of a tree to his left, bringing the fifty metre tall trunk crashing down. Mkoll
slid under it where the ground dipped, pulling himself through a gully full of rushing water. Emerging on the other
side, with the fallen trunk as cover, he found sound had returned. The water had sluiced the sticky mud from his ears
and the sides of his head. Noise rushed in at him: the thunder, the crack of shots, the clamouring voices like a baying
pack of hounds.
Digging his heels into the soft ground for purchase, he swung up and leaned across the tree trunk, firing a pistol in
each hand. The laser bolts from his regular gun were stark and white. Those from the captured weapon were dirty
and red. He shot at the two attackers closest to him and dropped them straight off. One fell twisted, into a tangle of
foliage. The other slid on his nose, spread-eagled, right down the slope and disappeared into the rushing water of the
creek bed below.
Mkoll ducked down and crept along the length of the fallen trunk as return fire cremated and split the section he
had been using for cover. Digging his feet in again, he popped up once more, and shot another enemy through the side
of the head.
Two more were close on him, but a thick brake of trees baffled his aim. Shots tore at him. He blasted with his twin
guns again, exploding the shoulder of an attacker flanking him to the left. A las-round exploded the trunk in front of
him and he reeled back into shelter, sucking at the new splinters of wood slivered into his forearms and fingers.
Mkoll fought away the sharp, superficial pain. He began to crawl along under the block of the tree trunk again, but
back towards his original position of cover to wrong-foot them. The next time he rose to bring his weapons to bear,
three of the enemy soldiers had reached his last position and were clambering over the fallen log to blast down into
the gully beyond. Firing down the length of the tree, Mkoll killed them all before they realised they were shooting at
nothing. One toppled back and slid under the trunk, another fell across it and dropped into thick mud that sucked his
corpse half-under. The third fell draped across the log.
The flares were dying and the strobe lighting of the storm was beginning to reassert itself.
Mkoll saw that dozens more of the enemy were advancing down the slope from above, and there were still four or
five in his immediate field of fire.
He was running out of chances and options. He began to run, back down the length of the fallen log, then across the
contour of the hill towards the ruin in the incline beyond Shots chased him. He fell once — and it saved his life, as
las-rounds cut the air that had, just a second before, been occupied by his head. He rolled down the bank, only partly
voluntarily, then scrambled up again and ran on. More flares lit the sky. Silver light kissed the ground, the muddy
slope and the curtain of rain. The trees became black fingers with multiple shadows.
Two enemy soldiers charged at him out of the spray, head on One fired, his shots going wild. Mkoll’s guns were
still in his hands and he shot each one in the head as he ran between them. Behind the dead, three more. One managed
to react fast enough to pull his trigger and Mkoll felt his neck recoil as something painfully hard and hot stung across
his scalp. Blood streamed down his face. He wondered if he had been shot in the head, if his thoughts and motions
were simply a nervous reaction carrying him forward past the point of death, his brain cooked backwards out of the
exploded cup of his skull.
Whatever the truth, he wasn’t going to stop. He shot the foe who had hit him with both pistols, then leapt the
corpse, extending his guns out on either side to target the other pair. The leap was brave but foolish. Treacly mud
took his feet away as he landed and his shots went wild. Tracking him as he leapt between them, the two soldiers of
Chaos fired simultaneously and killed each other. Mkoll struggled up, laughing out loud at this little piece of Imperial
justice. Then he stopped and holstered one of his guns, feeling his scalp with his freed hand. He fully expected to
find a jagged edge of skull like a broken egg, but there was a just bloody gouge across the top of his head, and a
section of his hair was crisped away. His cap had vanished. It had been a glancing wound. No doubt Rawne would
have remarked upon the obstinate solidity of his skull.
He stumbled on towards the rise, needles of red light sweeping his trail. Outnumbered and outgunned, he realised
it was time for the most drastic action.
Mkoll reached a tough-looking stump and lashed himself to it with his webbing. He took three tube-charges out of
his thigh pouch, wound them tightly in a bunch with tape and hurled them back up the slope behind him.
Lightning broke at the same second the charges went off, washing out the flash and the roar. Then the entire hillface
squealed and fell away, a vast mud-slide that brought thousands of tonnes of liquid mud, rock and plants down,
sweeping the enemy away with it into a soft tomb at the creek bed.
Waves of mud and liquid filth smashed into Mkoll; timbers carried down from higher up slammed into him. He
choked and vomited on the fluid rush.
Then it was over. The storm blitzed on and the air was reeking with the pungent smell of freshly exposed soil.
Mkoll was hanging from the tree stump by his webbing. The slide had washed away his footing and carried off
several metres of top-soil, but the stump’s deep roots had been more firmly bedded. It was one of the few things still
standing proud of the smooth, sagging, crescent-shaped mud-slip.
Mkoll pulled off his webbing and dropped free. Nearby, the clawing hand of a buried foe warrior jerked and
clawed up from the thick mud. Mkoll fired into the mud until the hand stopped twitching.
He made it to the next rise and looked down into the deep jungle cavity where the ruin sat, solemn and mysterious
on a high mound. The second volley of flares were dying away now, but he knew what he saw.
The ruin was besieged by Chaos. Hundreds of thousands of enemy warriors, glistening and churning like beetles in
the downpour, assaulted the great ruin from all sides.
They were relentless, ignoring the storm as if all that mattered was the jagged crown of stones at the top of the
mound.
“What is that place?” Mkoll breathed aloud. “What is it you want?”
Still shrieking and exploding overhead, the storm didn’t answer him.
The sky spasmed above them, stricken with electrical convulsions, first platoon, with the remnants of Corbec’s unit
and the stragglers of Lerod’s who had joined them by accident in the storm’s chaos, struggled on as they beat the
retreat.
Gaunt came upon Corbec, who was clambering in the lead through the rain and the undergrowth. Trooper Melk
was now on a stretcher carried in the rear of the retreat.
“What?” Gaunt gasped to his colonel, water streaming off his lean face.
“A river!” Corbec spat, surprised. Ahead of them, a thunderous torrent roared through the trees, foamy and deep
and dangerously fast. It hadn’t been there when they had come in. Gaunt stood, pummelled by the rain, and tried to
make sense of the landscape in the flickering dark. He ordered Trooper Mktea forward and took one of his tubecharges.
Corbec watched in disbelief as Gaunt taped it to the base of a massive ginkgo trunk and primed the fuse.
“Back!” Gaunt shouted.
The explosion cut the tree above the root and dropped its sixty metre mass across the boiling tide: a bridge of
sorts.
One by one, the men crawled across. Corbec led them to prove it could be done, cursing as each handhold slipped
and tore away from the sodden bark. Trooper Vowl lost his grip and dropped from the horizontal log. The flash-flood
carried him away like a cork. A screaming cork.
On the far side, Corbec saw to the defence of the position, ordering each drenched man fresh from the crossing
into place, lasgun aimed, creating a wide dispersal of ready soldiers in a fan to protect those still crossing the timber
bridge.
Corbec moved forward himself, into the horsetail ferns and hyacinths, their fronded leaves lashed and shaken by
the drumming rain. There was movement ahead. He reported it via his micro-bead but got nothing back. The storm
was playing merry hell with the vox-links. Clammy, cold hands tightening on his lasgun, Corbec inched forward.
A hellgun fired to his right, wide, a piercing distinctive report. He started forward and fell into the grip of three
large figures which slammed into him out of the pulsing darkness. He lost his lasgun. A fist hit him in the back of the
neck and he dropped, then recovered and punched out. One of his assailants went down in the mud. Another kicked at
him and Corbec kicked back, breaking something crucial.
He was wrestling with the biggest of his opponents now, blind in the rain and the mud spray. Corbec got a glimpse
of gold and grey carapace armour, an Imperial Eagle stud of precious blue. Underneath his rolling foe, he punched
upwards into what should have been the face twice and then rolled his stunned aggressor over so that he was
straddling him.
A flash of lightning. Corbec saw he was astride a Volpone Blueblood, a big man with a battered, bloodied face. A
major. Corbec had his hands around the man’s throat.
“What the feth?” he gasped. Hellgun muzzles were suddenly pressing to his head.
“You stinking bastard!” the major underneath him groaned venomously, trying to rise.
Corbec raised his hands in a gesture of surrender, wary of the guns around him. The major, released, threw Corbec
back off him and rose, pulling out his hellpistol and aiming at Corbec’s head.
“Don’t,” said a voice, quiet yet more commanding than the thunder.
Gaunt stepped into the clearing, his bolt pistol aimed squarely at Major Gilbear’s cranium. The Blueblood guns
swung around to point at him but he didn’t flinch.
“Now,” Gaunt added. His gun was unfaltering. Corbec looked up from the mud, lying on his back, conscious that
the Blueblood major’s gun was still pointed his way.
“Shoot him and I can assure you, Gilbear, you will be dead before any of your men can fire.” Gaunt’s voice was
low and threatening. Corbec knew that tone.
“Gaunt…” Gilbear murmured, not slackening his aim.
More Ghosts moved in around the commissar, guns aimed.
“Something of a stand-off,” Corbec muttered from the ground. Gilbear kicked him, his aim not leaving Corbec’s
head, his gaze not leaving Gaunt.
“Lower your weapon, Major Gilbear.” Inquisitor Lilith stepped into the glade, her cowl drawn up, a staccato roll
of thunder eerily punctuating her words.
Gilbear wavered and then holstered his gun.
“Help Colonel Corbec to his feet,” Lilith added in the perfect, effete tones of the courtly dialect.
Gaunt’s aim had not changed.
“And you, commissar. Put up your weapon.”
Gaunt lowered his bolt pistol.
“Inquisitor Lilith.”
“We meet again,” she said, turning away, a shrouded, sinister figure in the rain.
Gilbear held his hand down to Corbec and pulled him to his feet. Their eyes locked as Gilbear brought him up.
Gilbear had the advantage of a few centimetres in height, and his broad shoulders, encased in the bulky carapace
segments, eclipsed Corbec’s shambling form, but the Tanith colonel had the benefit of sheer mass.
“No offence,” Gilbear hissed into Colm Corbec’s face.
“None taken, Blueblood… until next time.”
Gaunt passed Gilbear as he approached Lilith, and the commissar and the major exchanged looks. Neither had
forgotten Voltemand.
“Inquisitor Lilith,” Gaunt began, raising his voice over the cacophony of the storm, “is this a chance encounter or
have you sniffed me out with your psyker ways?”
She turned and looked at him, clear eyed. “What do you think, Ibram?”
“What am I supposed to think, inquisitor?”
She half-smiled, rain pattering off her white skin. “A psyker storm lights up the battle zone, aborting our assault
against the foe.”
“You’re not telling me anything I hadn’t already noticed.”
“Where is your Third platoon?”
Gaunt shrugged. “You tell me. Voxing has become impossible in this hell.”
She showed him the lit dial of her data-slate.
“They’re right in there, as last reported, fell me, don’t you think it’s significant?”
“What?”
“Milo… Oh, he answered my questions and wriggled out, but still, I wonder.”
“What do you wonder, inquisitor?”
“A boy suspected of psyker power, given rank by you, in the depth of this when it begins.”
“This is not Brin Milo’s work.”
“Isn’t it? How can you be sure?” Gaunt was silent.
“What do you know of psykers, commissar? What do you know? Have you talked with them? Have you seen the
way they blossom? A boy, a girl, barely in their teens, never having shown any spark of the craft, suddenly becoming
all that we fear.”
Gaunt stayed quiet. He didn’t like where this was going.
“I’ve seen it, Ibram. The sudden development of untrained powers, the sudden eruption of activity. You can’t know
for sure this isn’t Milo’s doing.”
“It isn’t. I know it isn’t.”
“We’ll see. After all, that’s what we are here to find out.”
Rawne stared down from a slit window in the thick stonework, night rain and high winds lashing the outside. There
were fires outside, but no longer the reassuring lines of cook fires on the founding fields. The sky had fallen. Doom
had come to Tanith. If there had been any doubt, Rawne had seen warning flares rise and fall above the tree line not
three minutes past.
Rawne clutched his freshly-issued lasgun to his chest. At least he would get to use it before he died.
“What’s happening, sir?” Trooper Caffran asked. Rawne bit back the urge to yell at him. The boy was a novice,
first taste of battle. And Rawne was the only officer present.
“Planetary assault. The enemy have fallen on us while we were still mustering.”
Others in the squad moaned.
“We’re finished,” Larkin howled and Feygor disciplined him with a blow to his kidneys.
“Enough of that talk!” Rawne snapped. “They’ll not take Tanith without a fight from us! And we can’t be the only
unit inside the Elector’s palace! We have a duty to protect the life of the Elector.”
The rest murmured and nodded. It was a desperate course, but it seemed right. They all felt it.
Feygor checked his intercom again. “Nothing. The lines are dead. Must be scrambling us.”
“Keep trying. We have to locate the Elector and form a cohesive defence.”
Brin Milo’s head was spinning. It all seemed so unreal, but he cautioned himself that was just shock at the speed
of events. It had been stressful enough to prepare to leave Tanith for ever. All the men had been edgy these last few
days. Now… this nightmare.
That was what it was like. A nightmare. A twisting of reality where some things seemed blurred and others bright
and over-sharp.
There was no time to settle his nerves or soothe it away Gunfire and a gout of flame rushed down the stone
hallway from behind them. The enemy had gained access to the palace Rawne’s squad took cover-places along the
wall and returned fire.
“For Tanith!” Rawne yelled. “While it yet lives!”
Eon Kull, the Old One, awoke with a start. He cried out, an animal bark of pain. He found himself lying on the
polished stone floor of the Inner Place. For a moment, he did not remember who or what he was.
Then it trickled back, like sand through the waist of an hourpiece, a grain at a time. He had lost consciousness and
lain here, undiscovered, in his delirium.
He could barely rise. His hands trembled; his limbs were as weak as a fildassai. Blood was clotting in his mouth
and nose. He felt his beating organs and pumping lungs rustle and wheeze inside his ribs like dying birds in a cage.
He had to take stock. Had he been successful?
The spirit stones had all gone dark. Fuehain Talchior sat silent and still in her rack. The rune slivers were
scattered across the floor as if someone had kicked over the arrangement. Some glowed red hot and smouldered like
iron in a smelter. Others were wisps of curled ash.
Eon Kull Warlock gasped at the sight. He clawed at the runes, gathering up the fragments and the ash, burning his
fingers. In the name of Vaul the Smithy-God, what had he wrought this day? What had he done? Attempted too much,
that was certain His age and his frailty had failed him, made him pass out and lose control, but surely for only a
second or two. What had he unleashed? Sacred Asuryan, what had he done?
His exhausted mind sensed Muon Nol returning to the Inner Place. The warrior should not, would not see him like
this, Eon Kull found strength from somewhere and hauled himself back into his throne, clasping the purse of ash and
bone-cinders to his belt. Joints cracked like bolter shots and he felt blood rise in his gorge as his head span.
“Lord Eon Kull? Are you… well?”
“Fatigued, no more. How goes it?”
“Your… storm… it is a work of greatness. More fierce than I had imagined.”
Eon Kull frowned. What did Muon Nol mean? He couldn’t show his ignorance to the warrior. He would have to
reach out and see for himself. But his mind was so weak and spent.
“The Way must be closed now. The storm won’t last forever.”
Muon Nol knelt on both knees and made the formal gesture of petition. “Lord, I beseech you once more, for the last
time, let us not abandon the Way here. Let me send to Dolthe for reinforcements. With exarchs, with the great Avatar
itself, we can hold out and—”
Eon Kull bade him rise, shaking his helmeted head slowly. He was glad Muon Nol couldn’t see the blood that
tracked down his septum and over his dry lips. “And I tell you, for the last time, it cannot be. Dolthe can spare no
more for us. They are beset. Have you any idea of the scale of the foe here on Monthax?” Eon Kull leaned forward
and touched Muon Nol’s brow with his bared hand, sending a hesitant mental pulse that conveyed the unnumbered
measure of the foe-host as he had sensed it. Muon Nol stiffened and shuddered. He looked away.
“Chaos must not take us. They must be denied access to the Webway. Our Way here must be closed now, as I have
wished it.”
“I understand,” the warrior nodded.
“Go see to the final provisions. When all is ready, come and escort me to the High Place. That is where I will
meet my end.”
Alone again, Eon Kull the Old One flexed his mind, trying to peer out beyond the Inner Place and sense the outside
world. But he had no strength. Had he expended so much? What had Muon Nol meant when he remarked upon his
storm?
Shuffling, unsteady, Eon Kull crossed the Inner Place and opened the lid of a quartz box set against the wall. It
was full of charred dust and some empty silk bags. A rare few still held objects and he took one out now. The
wraithbone wand slipped out of its protective bag into his hand. It was warm, pulsing; one of the last he had left. He
shuffled back to the throne, sank onto the seat with a sigh and clutched the wand to his chest. He prayed that there
was strength enough in it to channel and focus his dissipated powers. The embers of his power lit through the wand,
and the spirit stones around him and set into his armour blinked back into a semblance of life. Most of them, at least.
Some remained dull and dead. Many merely flickered with a dull luminosity.
His mind blinked, two or three times, flashing images of the outside which roared and wailed. Then it coalesced
and he saw.
He saw the storm, the magnitude of the storm. He cursed himself. He should have realised that he had been too
weak to control such a conjuration. He had intended a storm, of course, as a diversion to cover his more subtle,
complex illusions. But the stress had robbed him of consciousness, and he had lost control.
He had unleashed a warp-storm, a catastrophic force that now raged entirely beyond his ability to command, far
from covering the humans and allow them in close enough for the illusions to work them to his cause, he had all but
blasted them away.
His head lolled back. His final deed had been a failure. He had exhausted his entire power, burned his runes,
extinguished some of his guide spirits, and all for this. Kaela Mensha Khaine! An elemental force of destruction that
fell, unselective, upon all. It roared about him, like a war-hound he had spent months training, only to see it go feral.
There were a few faint spats of light, the traces of a handful of humans who had been close enough to become
wrapped in his illusions. But far from enough.
Lord Eon Kull, Old One, warlock, wept. He had tried. And he had failed.
Mkoll had been stumbling through the torrential rain for fifteen or more minutes before he stopped dead in his tracks,
shook himself in amazement, and then hurled himself into the cover of a dripping, exposed tree-root.
It was not possible. It was… some kind of madness.
He look up at the stormy sky, shuddered and hugged himself. All along, he had suspected the storm was not natural
in origin. Now he knew it was playing with his mind.
This was Monthax, Monthax, he told himself, over and over. Not Tanith.
Then why had he spent the last twenty minutes making his way home to the farmstead he shared with his wife and
sons in the nal-groves above Heban?
Shock pounded in his veins. It was like losing Eiloni all over again, though he knew she was dead of canth-fever
these last ten, fifteen years. It was like losing Tanith again, losing his sons.
He had been so convinced he was hurrying back through a summer storm from the high-pasturing cuchlain herds,
so convinced he had a wife and a farm and a family and a livelihood to return to. But in fact he had been scrambling
his way back towards the ruin and the massed forces of the enemy.
How had his mind been so robbed of truth? What witchcraft was at work?
He pulled himself to his feet and made off again, now in the opposite direction, towards what he prayed were
friendly lines.
On Lilith’s orders, a sizable force of men began pushing back into the storm-choked jungles. Her bodyguard formed
around her, following a roughly equal number of Tanith Ghosts under Gaunt, the regrouped remnants of the first,
Second and Seventh platoons. The wounded had been sent on to the lines.
Gilbear had protested, both at the advance and the co-operation of the Tanith, but Lilith had made no great efforts
to disguise her contempt for him when she denied his objections. If her fears were realised, this was Gaunt’s
business as much as hers. Besides, the Ghosts had already been in there, and had a taste of what to expect, for all the
vaunted veteran skills of the Volpone’s elite Tenth Brigade, she wanted a serious fighting force, with enough numbers
that losses wouldn’t dent. Sixty men, or thereabouts, half dedicated heavy infantry, ordered to guard her by the
general, half the best stealth fighters in the Guard, led by their own charismatic commissar.
A reasonable insurgency force, she reckoned. Still, she had had her astropath signal back for reinforcements.
Thoth had been reluctant until she had pulled rank and suggested the magnitude of the threat. Now five hundred
Bluebloods under Marshal Ruas and three hundred Roane Deepers under Major Alef and Commissar Jaharn were
moving up in their wake, an hour or so behind them. The astropath was now dead from the effort of sending and
receiving through the storm. They left his body where it lay.
It seemed bloody-minded to push a unit back into the storm zone when all other Imperials had retreated out of it,
and it seemed to compound that error by sending in fresh numbers after them. But Lilith knew that, storm or no storm,
Chaos host or no Chaos host, the key to victory on Monthax lay in the heart of that zone. And the focus of her own,
personal inquisition too, perhaps.
Lerod led the spearhead, lie had volunteered, brimming with an enthusiasm that Gaunt found faintly alarming.
Yael, one of Lerod’s men from the Seventh, had told of Lerod’s miraculous escape from the enemy gunners on the
creek bank, and explained that Lerod now thought his life charmed.
Gaunt wondered for a moment. He’d seen that sort of luck-flare before, where a man thought himself invulnerable.
The consequences could be appalling. But he’d rather have Lerod laying his “luck” at the front than cursing them
lower down the file.
Besides, Lerod was a fine soldier. One of the best, the most level-headed.
And more than that… All of the Ghosts, Corbec included, seemed somehow eager to get back into the deadly
storm. It was as if something called to them. Gaunt had seldom seen them so highly motivated.
And then, in a pause, he realised that he, too, was more than willing to turn back into the fatal onslaught besetting
the dense jungle and creeks. He couldn’t account for it. It alarmed him.
Lilith’s brigade slogged in through the creek-ways and water-runs, beaten by the rain and wind. The muddy ground
became steep slopes, the low rises of upland rain forests above the flooded swamps.
Lilith sent pairs of men forward to secure lines. Corbec and a couple of Ghosts and Bluebloods clambered
forward with Lerod up the muddy escarpments, playing out cables that they secured to trees and stumps along the
way. Lightning berated them, exploding the tallest trees round about.
The brigade moved forward, following the twin lines of cable the advance had played out.
High on a slope, Corbec nailed the end of his cable line to a stump, and then set watch with his party as the main
force struggled up behind. One of the Bluebloods looked at him, smiling.
“Culcis?”
“Colonel Corbec!”
Corbec slapped the younger man on the armoured shoulder, and the other Bluebloods eyed this camaraderie with
suspicion.
“Where was it — Nacedon?”
“In the farm. I owe you my life, colonel.”
Corbec guffawed. “I remember you fought as hard as the next that night, Culcis!”
The young man grinned. Rainwater dripping down his face from his helmet lip.
“So you made the Tenth, huh?” Corbec asked, settling in next to the Blueblood and taking aim into the blistering
dark.
“Your medic wrote well of me, and your leader, Gaunt, mentioned me in dispatches. Then I got a lucky break on
Vandamaar and won a medal.”
“So you’re veteran now? One of the Blueblood elite? Best of the best, and all that?”
Culcis chuckled. “We’re all just soldiers, sir.”
The twin lines of advance progressed slowly up the slopes along the cable lines, weaving between the heavy trees
and saturated foliage. The ground was like watered honey, loose and fluid, coming up to their shins. At least there
were no insects abroad in the onslaught.
They moved on in fire-team formation, following a deep valley into the jungle uplands and the heart of the roiling
storm. Lilith called a halt, to get a fix on their position. She was just raising her data-slate when a searing light
flashed and they were deafened.
Lightning had struck a tree twenty paces back, exploding it in a welter of wooden shrapnel. Two Bluebloods had
been atomised by electrical arcs and another two, along with one of the Tanith, had been flayed alive by the wood
chips.
Major Gilbear slammed into Lilith as he stumbled up the slope. “We must retreat, inquisitor! This is madness!”
“This is necessary, major,” she corrected, and returned her gaze to the slate. Gaunt was by her side. They
compared data, pelting rain pattering off the screens of their respective devices.
“There’s your Third platoon,” she said.
“As you had it last fixed before the storm came down,” corrected Gaunt. “They were in the eye of the storm then,
but can you get a true fix on their location now? Or on ours?”
Lilith cursed silently. Gaunt was right. They were cut off from orbital locator signals, and the storm was playing
merry hell with all their finders and codiciers. All they had to work on was a memory or location and terrain. And
none of that seemed reliable.
Gaunt drew her to one side, out of Gilbear’s earshot. “My men are the best scouts in the Guard, but they’re coming
up blind. If this storm is psyker like you say, it’s foxing us. I’m not sure we can find our way to the last recorded
position of the Third.”
“And so you suggest?”
“I don’t know,” Gaunt said, meeting her grim eyes. “But if we move much further in, I’m not sure we’ll be able to
find our way back…”
“Sir! Commissar!” It was Raglon, the vox-officer. He scrambled back down the muddy slope to Gaunt and held
out his headset.
“Third, sir! I’ve got them! Indistinct, broken, but it’s Major Rawne and the others all right. I copy micro-bead
traffic, trooper to trooper. Sounds like they’re in a fight.”
Gaunt took the headset and listened. “Can you get a fix?”
Raglon shook his head. “The storm’s fething everything, sir. I can’t get the vox signals to jibe with anything. It’s
like… like they’re nowhere and everywhere.”
“Nonsense!” Gilbear barked, snatching the headset from Gaunt and adjusting the dials on Raglon’s caster set.
After a moment, he gave up with a curse.
“Try sending to them,” Gaunt told Raglon. “Repeat signal, wide-beam.”
“Message?” Raglon asked.
“Gaunt to Tanith Third platoon. Give status and position signal.”
Raglon dialled it in. “Nothing sir, repeating… Wait! A response! Sir, it reads: ‘Position: Elector’s Palace, Tanith
Magna. Rearguard’.”
“What?” Gaunt grabbed the headset again. “Rawne! Rawne! Respond!”
The third were holed up at a bend in the hallway, las-rounds blistering back and forth from a ferocious firefight.
Over his micro-bead, Rawne could hear Gaunt’s signal.
“Try them again,” he urged Wheln, who was fumbling with the dials on the vox-caster backpack.
Rawne hated this Gaunt already, this new commander brought from oil-world to lead them. Where was he? What
did he care for Tanith?
Wheln interrupted Rawne’s thoughts. “Gaunt signals, sir! He says to withdraw and pull out. Instructs us to rally
with him at the following co-ordinates.”
Rawne eyed the print out and threw it aside. It made no sense.
Gaunt was ordering them to abandon the palace and Tanith Magna itself.
“Give me that!” he shouted to Wheln, taking the headset.
“Sir?” Ragon held out his headset to Gaunt. “I don’t understand…” Gaunt took it and listened.
“…won’t give up now… won’t let Tanith fall! Damn you, Gaunt, if you think we’ll give up on the planet now!”
Gaunt lowered his hand, letting the headset droop. “Crazy,” Gaunt murmured. “He’s crazy…”
Mkoll shouldered on through the rain. He focussed his mind on reality and shut up the yearnings in his head. Home,
the lines… he would make it…
Las-shots scorched at his heels, exploding trees. He glanced backwards and began to run.
An enemy warrior loomed ahead of him and Mkoll blasted with one of his pistols, taking the head clean off.
All around him, in the rain, Chaos warriors were closing.
He ducked into cover as laser blasts puffed up leaf-mould and weed. Two shots to the left. Two to the right. A hit,
and body falling and twisting in the grime. Then Mkoll was up and running again.
A shot clipped his head and he went down, full length, into the mud. He tried to rise, but his body was slow and
dazed. The mud sucked at him.
A powerful hand took him by the shoulder and yanked him over, the mud sucking as it kissed him goodbye.
Mkoll looked up into the face of Death, the raddled face of an enemy trooper. He shot him point blank and then
rose, cutting the knees off the next foe who advanced with a double spit of las-fire from his guns.
Mkoll started shooting wholesale, picking off shadows that loomed between the trees through the storm, and fired
on him.
Another shot kissed his flank and burned a scar that would never leave him. Mkoll dropped to one knee, firing
with both pistols. He killed left and right. Maximum firepower. Then he realised his captured laspistol was coughing
inert gas. He threw it aside.
As he went to reload his issue pistol, a huge form barrelled into him and knocked him down. The Chaos trooper
had his bayonet raised to rip Mkoll’s life out of his body.
They wrestled in the mud for a few moments, until Mkoll was able to use his trained skill to roll the other off him.
The sprawling warrior threw his bayonet and it impaled Mkoll’s left knee with a clack of metal on bone and a
ripping of tendons. Mkoll faltered and fell.
The enemy was back on him, hands outstretched and a murderous howl on his sutured lips.
They fell back, thrashing, fighting. Mkoll couldn’t reach the Tanith blade in his waistband, but he found the enemy
bayonet sticking out of his knee and wrenched it free.
Cursing his life and mourning Eiloni, Mkoll plunged the dagger two, three, four times into the side of his
aggressor’s neck, until the bestial warrior shuddered and died.
Mkoll pulled himself free of the corpse, blood jetting from his knee with a force too great for the downpour to
diminish.
He stumbled on, armed only with the enemy knife now. He was getting weaker as he lost blood. he foot of his
wounded leg was hot with blood, yet cool. His knee didn’t work properly. More fire came his way, cutting the limbs
of trees and bursting ripe fruit-flowers.
A deflecting laser round took him in the small of the back, and dropped him, face down, in the mire. Stunned, he
writhed, no breath coming, mud sucking into his nose and mouth.
Something made him pull himself up. Something, some urge.
Eiloni. She stood over him, as pale and as beautiful as she had been at twenty.
“What are you doing down there? What will the boys do for supper? Husband?”
She was gone as quickly as she had appeared, but Mkoll was already on his feet when the first of the Chaos spawn
closed in on him. On his feet and seared with passion.
Despite the burn, agonising, on his back, Mkoll took the first down with his hands, breaking his neck and ribs and
crushing his skull. Capturing the lasgun, he turned, setting it to full auto and cutting down a wave of Chaos infantry as
they pressed in on his heels.
He was still shooting, blindly into the night, his lasgun’s power cell almost exhausted and three dozen slain foe
about him, when Corbec found him.
Gaunt established a picket perimeter in the sloping forest to guard them as the field medics treated Mkoll. The storm
continued to lacerate the sky above and sway the trees with the sheering force of wind and nearly horizontal rain.
Lilith, Gilbear and Gaunt stood by as Trooper Lesp opened his field narthecium and dressed Mkoll’s many cuts
and las-burns. The scout’s head was bandaged and his pierced knee had been strapped.
“He’s a tough old dog,” Corbec murmured to Gaunt, sidling up to the commissar.
“He never ceases to impress me,” Gaunt whispered back.
Lilith looked over at them, a question in her face. Gaunt knew what it was: how had this man survived?
“We’re wasting time,” Gilbear said abruptly. “What are we doing?”
Gaunt turned on him, angry, but Lilith stepped between them.
“Major Gilbear. Are you still my bodyguard commander?”
“Yes, lady.”
“No new duties have fallen to you since you were given that task?”
“No, lady.”
“Then shut up and leave this to the commissar and myself, if you don’t mind.”
Gilbear swung around and made off to check the pickets.
Corbec poked his tongue out at the major’s back and made a vulgar noise. Gaunt was about to reprimand him
when he saw Lilith was laughing.
“He’s a pompous ass,” Lilith said.
“Indeed,” the commissar nodded.
“I meant no disrespect, inquisitor,” Corbec said hurriedly. “Yes, you did,” Lilith smiled.
“Well, yes, but not really,” Corbec stammered.
“Check the picket, colonel, if you please,” Gaunt said quietly.
“But the major’s gone to—”
“And you trust him to do a good job?” Gaunt asked.
“Not on his current form, no,” Corbec grinned, saluting Gaunt and making an over-lavish bow to the inquisitor
before hurrying off.
“You’ll have to excuse my second-in-command. His style of leadership is casual and spirited.”
“But it works?” asked Lilith.
“Yes, but… yes. Corbec is the soundest officer I’ve ever worked with. The men love him.”
“I can see why. He has charisma, courage. Just the right amount of healthy disrespect. Colm is a very attractive
man.”
Gaunt paused and looked off into the night where Corbec had vanished.
“He is?”
“Oh yes. Trust me on that.” Lilith turned her attention back to Mkoll. “So, we have your best scout, beaten and shot
to hell, come to us out of the maelstrom?”
“Yes.” Gaunt cleared his throat. “Mkoll’s the best I have, all in all. Looks like he’s been through fething hell and
back.”
“Feth… nice word. Good weight. I’ll be using that if you don’t mind.”
Gaunt was puzzled. “Mind? I—”
“What does it mean?”
Gaunt suddenly got a very clear and vivid mental picture of what it literally meant. He and Lilith were acting it
out. “I — I’m not sure…”
“Yes you are.”
Lightning struck a tree nearby, causing Bluebloods to run yelping for cover. The detonation was like a slap in the
face for Gaunt. His mind cleared, sober.
“Don’t play your mind tricks with me, inquisitor,” he snarled.
“I don’t know what you mean.”
“Yes, you do. Twisting a feeling of jealousy in me against Corbec. And the images you were broadcasting, feth is
one of the Tanith tree-gods. Not some barbaric euphemism. I’ll work with you, but not for you.”
Lilith smiled solemnly and held up her hands. “Fair point I’m sorry, Gaunt. I’m used to making allies where I can’t
find them, using my powers to twist wills to my purpose. I suppose it’s strange for me to have a willing comrade.”
“Such is the way of the inquisitor. And I thought the commissar’s path was lonely.”
She stared into his eyes and another smile lit her pale face. Gaunt wondered if this was another of her guiles, but it
seemed genuine.
“We both need to find and conquer the source of this,” Gaunt told her, gesturing up at the storm. “We both want
victory here. You’ll find me a much more able ally if I am in full command of my powers, rather then spellbound by
you.”
She nodded. “We both want victory here,” she said, repeating him. “But that’s not all I want,” she added,
mysteriously.
Gaunt was about to pick her up on it when she shivered, pushing back her cowl and running a hand through her fine
hair. The commissar-colonel realised how strained she looked.
“This storm… it’s really hard for you, isn’t it?”
“I’m at my limit, Ibram. The warp is all around me, tugging at my mind. I’m sorry about before. Desperation.”
Gaunt stepped towards her, ushering her towards Mkoll. “You said you liked to make allies where you couldn’t
find them. Why so hard on Gilbear?”
She grinned. “He loves it. Are you kidding? A powerful woman ordering him around. He wants me so bad he’d
die for me.”
Now Gaunt grinned. “You’re a scary woman, Inquisitor Lilith.”
“I’ll take that as a compliment.”
“Just promise you won’t use such base tactics on me.”
“I promise,” she said. “I don’t think I need to.” Gaunt suddenly became aware of how long he had been looking
into her eyes. He broke the gaze. “Let’s talk to Mkoll.”
“Let me.”
“No,” he corrected. “Let us.”
Gilbear walked the picket in the slicing rain. Invisible amphibians croaked and rattled in the wet gloom. By a fold of
trees, watching the left flank, he found two Tanith Ghosts occupied in trying to light smokes from a damp tinder box.
Gilbear pounced at them, kicking one in the gut and punching the other over onto his back.
“What is this?” He seethed. “Are you watching the flank? No? You’re too busy lighting up and joking!”
One of the men protested and Gilbear kicked him again. In the face, the ribs, the kidneys as he went down. He kept
kicking.
“There’s a universe of hate out there, and you can’t be bothered to watch for it!”
The other Ghost had risen to defend his fallen, balled-up comrade, and Gilbear turned on him, punching him out,
then laying in with the boot.
A big hand caught the Blueblood major by the shoulder.
“There’s a universe of hate waiting in here too,” Corbec said.
He dropped Gilbear with a headbutt that split the Blueblood’s forehead. Then Corbec whaled in with two hard
punches to the mouth and chest. The latter was deflected by the carapace segments.
Gilbear sprawled in the mud, pulling Corbec down on him in a threshing frenzy.
“You want me, Ghost? You got me!” he growled.
“Not before time,” Corbec agreed, snapping Gilbear’s head backwards with his fist. “It’s been a long while
coming. That was for Cluggan, rest his soul.”
Gilbear folded his legs up and propelled Corbec headlong over him with a kick. The big Ghost slammed down
against a tree stump, upside down, the sharp stump-ends raking his back.
Now Gilbear was on his feet, fists balled. Corbec leapt up to meet him, throwing off his cape, fury in his eyes.
They edged around the muddy clearing in the slanting rain, water washing off them and sluicing the blood from their
wounds. Punch and counter-punch, followed by bellow and charge. The two beaten Ghosts were up on their feet,
cheering and jeering. Others, Ghosts and Bluebloods both, congregated in a ring as the two officers battled by
lightning flash.
Gilbear was a boxer, a heavyweight champion back on Volpone, with a stinging right hook and a terrifying
capacity to take punishment. Corbec was a wrestler, Pryze County victor three years running, at the Logging Show.
Gilbear bounced on spread legs, throwing humiliating punches. Corbec came in low, soaking them up, clawing his
hands around Gilbear’s throat.
With a roar, Corbec drove in under the whistling fists and slammed Gilbear backwards through a break of trees.
They tumbled together down a short incline into a creek bed swollen with storm water. The Ghost and Volpone
audience hovered at the rim of the creek, looking down and chanting.
Gilbear rose first, black with the muddy water, and swung a punch. It kissed air. Corbec exploded up out of the
flood, greased jet-black with liquid mud, and doubled Gilbear with a low punch to the gut, then sent him over in a
spray of silver droplets with an upper cut to the chin.
Gilbear wasn’t done. He came back out of the water like a surfacing whale, as loud and vicious as the storm
which quaked the sky above, and knocked Corbec back two, three steps with blow after blow. Corbec’s mouth was
split open and his nose broken, flooding his beard with blood.
Corbec ducked in low, throwing punches before he shoulder-charged Gilbear off his feet. Corbec lurched the
massive Blueblood backwards on his shoulder, legs dangling, then twisted and threw him over himself in a perfect
wrestling move, slamming Gilbear down into the creek on his back. Corbec kicked him for good measure.
Trooper Alhac, a Blueblood, was pounding his hands together wildly until he realised his side had lost. He was
about to turn his venom on the cheering Tanith beside him when the undergrowth to his left flickered.
Alhac froze. So did the Ghost he was about to strike.
Something black and abominable grew out of the jumping lights in the thicket.
Alhac died, cut into streaks of evaporating flesh. The Ghost beside him perished the same way a second later.
Then another Blueblood, skinned in an instant. The other Ghosts and Bluebloods who had been cheering the fight
from the creek edge fled in panic.
“Oh feth!” Corbec said, dripping with ooze, looking up.
“What?” asked Gilbear, rising beside him.
“That!”
The creature was like a dog, if a dog could be the size of a horse, if a horse could move as fast as a humming bird.
A red, arched-backed quadruped with long, triple jointed limbs and a skin-less, blistered pelt. Its skull was huge and
short, blunt, with the lower jaw extending beyond the upper, and multiple rows of triangular saw-teeth in each. It had
no eyes. A warp creature, loosed from the storm and hunting for Chaos.
“Oh feth!” Corbec spat.
“Great Vulpo!” barked Gilbear.
The dog-thing leapt down into the creek and began to pound towards them. Corbec and Gilbear turned and ran as
fast as they could through the root-twisted waterway. It was right behind them, baying.
The thing leapt on Gilbear and dragged him down, ripping at his carapace armour with its tusks. Strips of
armaplas shredded off his shoulder panels. Gilbear cried out, helpless.
Corbec leapt astride the warp-beast, pulling its head back by the mane and plunging his Tanith dagger into its
throat, foetid purple blood squirted from the wound and the thing opened its mouth to howl and squeal.
“Now, Blueblood! Now!” Corbec shouted, riding the beast, pulling its skull back.
Gilbear pulled a frag grenade from his belt and threw it straight into the beast’s mouth, right down its gullet past
the wincing pink larynx.
Gilbear threw himself down and Corbec propelled himself clear.
The dog-thing exploded from within, showering both them and the creek bed with stinking meat.
Corbec pulled himself up out of the fluid muck at the bottom of the watercourse. He looked across at Gilbear, sat
with his back against the creek wall, eyes straining.
“You all right?” Corbec gurgled.
Gilbear nodded.
“About time we called a truce, eh?”
Gilbear nodded again. They both got up, unsteady and filmed with mud and flecks of putrid meat. “A truce. Yes. A
truce…” Gilbear was still stunned. “For now.”
“The ruin, sir, the one I glimpsed before. I found it again.” Mkoll’s voice was soft and brittle, his breath laboured.
He sat on a fallen log, sipping alternately from a water canteen and a sacra flask that Bragg had manifested. He was
bandaged and caked in mud. Gaunt crouched by him, listening carefully. Mkoll seemed a little spooked by Lilith, but
she read this response quickly and held back so Gaunt could talk to his valued scout.
“What is it?” asked Gaunt.
Mkoll shrugged. “No idea. Big, old, fortified. It’s on top of a mound that I don’t think is natural. Too regular. All I
know is, the enemy are surrounding it thicker than sap-flies round a glucose trap.”
Gaunt felt a tingle of alarm. Not only did he know precisely what Mkoll meant, he had a brief, vivid mental flash
of the long-bodied insects themselves, swarming around a beaker of glistening fluid on a woodsman’s hut-stoop.
Insects native to Tanith. Insects he had never seen.
“Numbers?” he pressed on.
“I didn’t take a headcount,” Mkoll muttered dryly. “I was a little busy, fens of thousands is my guess. Maybe more,
beyond my line of sight. The terrain was hilly, thick cover. There could have been hundreds of thousands up there.”
“What are they after?” Gaunt wondered out loud.
“I think we have to find out,” Lilith said quietly.
Gaunt rose and looked round at the inquisitor, her face in shadow from her cowl. “Before we explore the insanity
of sending sixty men up against a possible force of hundreds of thousands, may I remind you that we can’t even find
this place? Our locators and auspex are screwed, my scouts can’t tell one direction from another, feth, Mkoll’s my
best, and he admits he only found it again by accident.”
Lilith nodded. “There is a deep level of misdirection and concealment in this storm. I don’t know the answer.”
“I could lead you there again,” Mkoll said darkly from behind them.
Gaunt turned to look at him. “You could? You claimed it was elusive before.”
Mkoll rose shakily to his feet. “That was then. I don’t know… I just feel I could find it again now. Something in
my bones. It would be like… like finding my way home again.”
Gaunt looked at Lilith. “Let’s try,” she said. “Mkoll seems confident and I trust him like you do. If opposition gets
too hot, we can pull out again.”
Gaunt nodded. He was about to call up Raglon and issue new orders to advance when the dull crump of a frag
grenade rolled through the storm. A few moments later, lasguns and hellguns were firing, sporadic, the distinctive
crack of laser fire overlapping the higher shriek of hell-shots. Gaunt scrambled down the bank, pulling out his
chainsword, shouting for reports.
Sergeant Lerod was directing the men in the east flank of the picket. “Lerod?”
“Sir! There are things coming out of the storm, sir! Brutes! Creatures!”
Gaunt peered out into the dark jungle, and saw scuttling monstrosities being born out of tendrils of lightning. There
was a sickening whiff of Chaos. Blueblood and Tanith guns blew the things apart as they came close.
“Warp creatures,” Lilith hissed, appearing by his side. “Manifestations of this unholy storm. Mindless, but lethal.”
Corbec staggered up, looking very much the worse for wear. He was ordering the west flank of the picket to loop
back closer to the centre.
“What happened to you?” Gaunt asked sharply, seeing an equally bedraggled Gilbear moving in with a fire-team
of Bluebloods.
“Bit of a fight,” Corbec said. “Some fething thing came out of the dark.”
Gaunt didn’t want to know any more. This was no time for fierce reprimands. He had to keep the whole unit tight
and together. He keyed his micro-bead. “Gaunt to brigade. We’re advancing, double time. Spearhead formation.
Tanith First platoon and half the Volpone unit at the point. Take your direction from Scout-Trooper Mkoll. Everyone
else, watch the flanks and the rear. Inquisitor Lilith instructs that warp-spawn could appear around or among us at
any time. Don’t hesitate; shoot. Sergeant Lerod, take a six-man drill and guard the back of the formation. All
commanders acknowledge understanding of these orders and signal readiness.”
A chatter of responses came back swiftly. Raglon, monitoring them with the vox-caster, nodded to Gaunt that all
the brigade had signalled in.
Gaunt hadn’t finished. The devoted Tanith had made his commissarial duties easy these last few years. But now
they were in thick, spooked, and the company was mixed with troopers he didn’t know or even trust. Morale,
discipline — the watchwords of the commissariat. He thought back to his training at the Schola Progenium, to his
field apprenticeship as a cadet under Oktar. He took the speaker horn of the vox-set from Raglon.
“I won’t pretend this will be easy. But it is vital. Vital to Imperial success on this world, vital perhaps to the
entire Crusade. The enemy and their ambitions will be denied, if it takes every spark of our lives and every drop of
our blood. We fight for the Emperor today, fight as if we were standing at his side as his chosen bodyguard. Protect
the men to your left and right as if they were the Emperor himself. Do not slacken, do not falter. Victory awaits you,
and if not victory, then the glory of a brave death in service to the Golden Throne of Terra. The Emperor will
provide, if you are true. His hand guides us, his eyes watch over us, and even in death he will bring us to him and we
shall sit in splendour at his side beyond the Eternity Gate.
“For Lost Tanith, for Mighty Volpone, for Imperial Earth… advance!”
Like a single, lithe entity, the brigade swept up the escarpment, pushing onwards into the jagged hills as the storm
shook the world around them. Blueblood and Ghost moved in perfect, trained order together, all animosities set
aside. Gaunt smiled as he observed the tight drilled formation of his own, and was suitably impressed that it was
matched by the bulky Volpone elite. Every now and then, las-shots sang out from the vanguard as warp-things were
sighted and dispatched.
Lilith moved with him. She slid a plasma pistol out from under her cloak and charged it with a flick of her blackgloved
hands. “Good speech,” she grinned at him. “Got them motivated. Oktar trained you well.”
“You’ve checked up on me. My background.”
“I’m an inquisitor, Gaunt. What do you expect? I enquire.”
“And what are you really inquiring about here on Monthax?” he asked curtly.
“What do you mean?”
“I’m no psyker, but I read people well enough. This is about more than victory here, more than the successful
prosecution of psyker-deviants in our forces. You have an agenda.”
She flashed a smile at him. “No mystery, Ibram. Back on the Sanctity, I told you. Bulledin had reported back to us
because it was suspected some powerful psyker component might be at work here. We thought that it was the enemy
itself, that we were in for a mind-war. But now, this ruin. The foe embark on an advance, ignoring us completely, and
seem hell-bent on taking that place. You’ve got to wonder why. You’ve got to believe that there’s something very
valuable up there.”
“Something that caused this storm?”
She shrugged. “Or something that made them cause this storm to cover their movement towards it. But I think your
guess is probably more likely.”
“And that’s what you want?”
“It’s my duty, Ibram. And I don’t think I need to explain that concept to one of the Imperium’s best commissars.”
“Don’t try distracting me with flattery. Give me some idea what you mean by ‘something valuable’.”
“Think back to Menazoid Epsilon. I told you, I checked your background thoroughly. As an inquisitor, I got to look
at some very classified reports. You know what was at stake there.”
Gaunt was wary. “You’re talking about technology? Artefacts?”
She nodded. “It could be.”
“Ancient human? Alien?”
Lilith produced something from her pocket. “Mkoll found this. He dug it out of a tree stump at a battle site just
before the storm hit. You tell me what you think it means.”
She held up the metal star with the sharpened points. Gaunt stared at it with dark comprehension.
“Now you know as much as I do.”
The brigade moved down a deep defile into a tree-sheltered vale that blocked the raging storm partially for the
first time. Gaunt was becoming numb with the incessant wind and rain, and knew his men must be too. It was a
blessed, temporary relief to move through the deep gorge with its almost cathedral-like arches of ancient cattails and
clopeas, where rain arrested by the leaf canopy simply drooled down to the ground in long, slow, sappy streams. The
storm raged, muffled, far above them.
Gaunt moved up to Mkoll at the point of the formation. “Still on track?”
Mkoll nodded. “Like I said, I couldn’t lose the trail now if I wanted to.”
“Like coming home, you said,” Gaunt reminded him. Mkoll closed his eyes and saw Eiloni just ahead, beckoning
him back to the farmstead. She was whispering promises of a hot supper, and of rowdy boys ready for one of their
father’s fireside tales before bed. “You have no idea, commissar.”
The advancing tide of Chaos warriors only stopped when the numbers of their dead choked the passageway.
Rawne ordered his platoon back and they hauled a set of double doors closed, barring them to seal the tunnel.
Milo helped Wheln swing the doors shut, his fingers tracing the heraldic badge of the Tanith Elector inscribed on the
heavy nal-wood panels. He blinked, and for a second saw taller, more slender doors of polished onyx, marked with
alien runes he did not understand.
“What’s up?” Wheln asked, panting.
Milo blinked again. The doors were arched nal-wood in the Tanith pattern again, the Elector’s insignia clearly
marked.
Feygor and Mkendrik dropped a long bar across the door loops to lock it tight. Beyond the thick barrier, they
could hear muffled explosions and the rasp of flamers as the enemy tried to unblock the corpse-packed tunnel.
The eight Tanith men were exhausted. A day ago, at the Founding, none of them — with the possible exception of
Rawne and Feygor — had ever fired a weapon in anger, let alone killed. Now they were truly baptised. There was
no counting the dead they had piled up.
Gown sank to his heels against the wall, fighting for breath. “Are we lost?” he asked. “Is Tanith lost?”
Rawne turned to face him, fire in his eyes. “Are we alive? Is Tanith living? Get up! Get up and move! Only that
feckless off-worlder Gaunt seems to have given up on Tanith! Withdraw? Abandon? What kind of leadership is that?
He’d make world-less ghosts of us!”
“Ghosts…” murmured Larkin, leaning slackly against the far wall, cheek and shoulder pressed against the cold
stone. “Gaunt’s Ghosts…”
“What did you say?” Milo asked directly, blood racing in his ears. It was like a dream was breaking in his head.
“Ignore him!” Feygor ordered. “Fething fool is weak in the head. But for his good eye, I’d have shot him as deadweight
before now.”
“No,” began Milo, “This isn’t right… it…”
“Of course it’s not right!” Feygor snarled into Milo’s face. Milo winced as spittle hit his cheek. “The Imperium
comes to Tanith when it needs men, but where is the Imperium now when Tanith needs it? They’re leaving us to die!”
Caffran pulled Feygor back from Milo sharply. “Then we’ll die well, Feygor! We’ll die fething well!” The young
trooper’s face was bright with passion. The thought of Laria burned in his mind. She was out there somewhere and
he would fight and kill and kill again to save this place and be with her once more.
“Caff’s right, Feygor,” Mkendrik said. Wheln and Cown both nodded in agreement. “Let’s die well so Tanith can
live.”
“And feth any off-world commissar who says otherwise!” spat Cown.
Feygor, subdued, turned and nodded, deftly exchanging the power cell of his lasgun for a fresh one.
Rawne had been absent for a few moments and now strode back into view. “I hear fighting down the hall, maybe
three hundred spans away. Sounds like another group of our boys in defence. I say we move in to support.”
Mkendrik nodded. “Bolster our numbers. Maybe they know where the Elector is sheltering.”
“If we could get him to the transport stables, we could maybe fly him to safety in a cutter,” Cown added.
Rawne nodded. “Feygor, make the door a surprise.”
Feygor grinned and took out a brace of tube-charges from his pack. He strapped them with quick, practised
diligence to the door bar. Anything that broke in here now after them would snap the trigger wire and bring the
hallway down on top of them.
“Let’s go!” Rawne ordered.
Milo fell into step with the others as they hurried on down the long palace hallway, boot-steps resounding from the
stone flags. He wished with all his heart and soul he could work out what was wrong with… with reality. There was
no other word. Reality itself seemed wrong and dreamlike and it was making his stomach turn. It must be the Chaos
daemons, Milo thought. Maybe Major Rawne knew wh—
Milo paused. Major Rawne? In the tents of the Founding Fields outside Tanith Magna, Rawne had bivouacked
with the common soldiers. A trooper, nothing more. No rank, no seniority. Since when had he got the collar pins and
the promotion?
Have I forgotten something? Milo wondered. Have I…
Another flicker in his mind. An image of… of a cramped cabin on a starship. Rawne, Corbec, Milo. A deputation.
A tall, powerful, lean-faced man that could only have been Commissar-Colonel Ibram Gaunt, rising to meet them.
How could he know what this Gaunt looked like? He’d never seen him. He could hear Gaunt speaking, making bold,
confident field promotions: Colonel Corbec, Major Rawne.
Another dream?
There was no time to think about it. They were almost on the fighting. Gunshots. Screaming, just ahead.
That wasn’t las-fire, Milo thought to himself as he and all the platoon checked stride and raised weapons. He’d
heard enough lasgun exchanges in the last half an hour to know the distinctive snap. This was an eerie, singing shrill;
a shrieking, a buzzing, like the saw-note of a wasp, amplified and broken into harsh, serried blasts.
What the feth was it?
“You hear that?” he gasped to Larkin beside him. Larkin was tuning the night-scope on his long gun, stabbing a
slender target beam of porcelain blue light up at the roof.
“What? Lasguns on full auto? Yeah… someone’s having a busy day.”
It’s not a lasgun, thought Milo, it’s not…
Third platoon rounded a corner in the hallway, moving in tight overlap formation, and broke into a wide audience
hall of dark, volcanic stone. Shattered stained glass windows depicting anroth, the household and forest spirits of
Tanith, lined one side of the vaulted chamber. Nal-wood pews, many shattered or overturned, filled the main body of
the room. The banner of the Elector hung in smouldering tatters over an oriole window at the far end. Three Tanith
troopers, their backs to them, were in position behind the pews, blasting with lasguns down at an arched door under
the oriole. Chaos spawn were battling to get in through the door, their dead sprawled all around the entrance, five or
more other Tanith troopers lay dead amid the wooden wreckage.
Without question or hesitation, the Third fell in beside their brethren and took up the fight, blasting at the doorway
and cutting into the advancing enemy. The three Tanith holding the chamber glanced around in surprise at the
newcomers. Milo didn’t recognise any of them, though the colonel was an unforgettable giant with a mane of white
hair riven with a red streak, a long noble face and the blue tattoo of a scythe on his cheek.
“For Tanith! For the Elector! For Terra!” Rawne yelled as he blasted.
The big colonel hesitated again, then returned his attention to the killing. “As you say,” he boomed melodiously,
his accent strange, “for… Tanith!”
Muon Nol, of the Dire Avengers Aspect, had been holding the green onyx vault with a squad of his warriors, seeing
them cut down one by one as Chaos forced their way into the chamber via the diamond-shaped prayer chute at the
end, under the rosette of spirit stones set high in the wall beneath the wraith-silk standard of Dolthe.
The only cover was the tangled mess of psycho-plastic benches which had once lined the celebrant vault, benches
that had been splintered or wilted by enemy fire. To the side of them, slender pointed windows paned with
translucent wraith-bone showed images of Asuryan, the Phoenix King, Khaine of the Bloody Hand, Vaul, the crippled
smith-god, Morai-Heg the fate-crone, and Lileath the Maiden, goddess of dream fortune, backlit by Farseer Fon
Kull’s warp-storm outside. It was Lileath who Muon Nol most worshipped, that beautiful diviner of futures and
possibilities. He wore her rune on a thread around his neck, under his jade-blue aspect armour.
Muon Nol’s white crested helmet was dinted with black las-scores, and the red plume crest was singed. Still
Uliowye, Lord Fon Kull’s holy buanna, spat whickering onslaughts of jagged, flickering star-rounds at the foe,
slicing them to pieces, a thousand rounds in each tight burst. The stabilising gyros whirred as the great, ornate
shrieker cannon bucked in his mesh-gloved hands. The accelerator field shimmered around the muzzle base,
Uliowye, the Kiss of Sharp Stars. He had perhaps six rods of solid ammunition left; he would make them count. For
Lileath, he would make them count. For Dolthe.
Suddenly, eight humans in drab, muddy uniforms fell in beside him, blasting their lasguns at the enemy. They were
resilient and fierce, and seemed to show no shock or surprise at their surroundings or sudden, new-found comradesin-
arms.
Psychically, Muon Nol ordered his remaining men to accept them and fight on. This was undoubtedly Lord Eon
Kull’s work — and Lord Eon Kull’s deceit.
And, Khaine, but these mon-keigh fought! Like they were fighting for their own homeworld it seemed, fighting for
everything they loved!
In under five minutes the reinforcement of the human soldiers had driven the Chaos spawn back. They pushed
forward together down the prayer chute and killed the last of the attackers, closing a great stone hatch shut to block
the rest.
The Master of the Bodyguard turned to the slim, dark-haired human who appeared to be the newcomers’ leader.
He searched for his grasp of Low Gothic, as he had learned in the training symposiums of Dolthe craftworld.
“I am Muon Nol, of Dolthe, of this Way Place. Your Intervention and aid is greeted with welcome. Lord Farseer
Eon Kull will thank you for it.”
“Colonel Munnol, from Tanith Dale. Good to see you boys, and no mistake. The Elector needs all the men he can get
right now.”
The tall Tanith officer with the mane of white hair turned to the Third as the shutter hatch closed. The exploded
carcasses of Chaos troops lay all around them.
Rawne nodded. “Glad to help. I’m Rawne, Major, commanding… well, what’s left of Third platoon. Place us
where you want us, colonel.”
Munnol nodded, but he seemed bewildered somehow, Milo thought. Come to that, he’d never seen a Tanith man
with anything but black hair. Not only were Munnol’s white locks odd, but both his men, who seemed uneasy now he
noticed, were white haired too.
Colonel Munnol nodded to a doorway to the left. It was a strange gesture. And what kind of weapon was he
holding? A lasgun… but long and extended, longer and thicker than Larkin’s sniper gun. Milo felt something tugging
anxiously at his mind.
“If you’re willing, Rawne human, the western emplacements need support desperately,” Colonel Munnol was
saying.
“Lead on!” barked Rawne, changing his energy cell and dropping the spent one to the floor. Munnol shrugged and
nodded, beckoning them after him.
Rawne human? Had he misheard? Milo followed, unnerved. Human? The nightmare refused to slip away. He
hated the terrible nauseous feeling of confusion.
At a fast pace, Munnol led the Third and his own men down a black granite corridor. Ahead of them, through an
archway, they could see two dozen more Tanith troopers lining a battlement, firing lasguns down into the stormy
night. Except that the noise was the shrieking chatter of something odd and otherworldly, not the reassuring snapreturn
of las-fire.
Rawne hurried beside the tall colonel, Feygor at his heels. “Can you believe this luck?” he laughed. “Chaos
attacking us on the very day of our founding?”
“No… indeed,” Munnol replied.
“I’ll be honest with you, Munnol… I almost didn’t sign up,” Rawne went on. “What kind of life is it, fighting your
way through the stars for the love of some fething uncaring Emperor, no hope of ever going home again?”
“Not an enticing prospect, Rawne human,” Munnol agreed.
“Feth, but I had a nice life back in Tanith Attica. A nice little business, if you understand me. Nothing too illegal,
but, you know, on the wrong side…”
“I understand…”
“Feygor was with me back then. Weren’t you, Feygor?” Rawne said, nodding at his comrade.
“Aye, Rawne, aye.”
“Nice work, good returns, didn’t want to give it up… but, feth take me for a chulan… I’m glad I did! feth the
Golden Throne… thank the anroth I’m armed and ready to stand for Tanith at this dread hour!”
“We all thank the anroth for that, Rawne human,” Munnol replied.
They were out on the battlements now, enemy fire ripping over them. Colonel Munnol called to his Tanith soldiers,
who looked around from the loopholes and crenellations where they had been firing down at the foe. White hair,
streaked with red, thought Milo with a shudder. They all have white hair.
He thought he was going to be sick.
“Men of Dolthe!” Munnol exclaimed.
Dolthe? Dolthe? Where was that? Milo wondered.
“Our Kin arrive to fight with us! Major Rawne and other humans! Treat them well, they are resolute and with us to
the end!”
A rousing cheer greeted Colonel Munnol’s words.
Rawne ordered the Third in alongside the Tanith already in place, taking position and firing down into the stormy
dark over the jagged lip of laser-chewed stonework.
Milo was about to take his place when he saw Larkin was cowering behind them all, crouched in the corner of the
battlement away from the fight, clutching his sniper rifle and shaking uncontrollably.
Milo crossed to him. “Larkin? What is it?”
“T-took a look through my scope… B-brin… they’re not human!”
“What?” Milo felt his guts clench, but he wasn’t going to give in.
“I know what I saw! Through my… my scope. It never lies. This big bastard Munnol and the rest! They’re not…
not Tanith!”
Milo snatched the sniper gun out of Larkin’s wavering hands, and sighted it at Munnol, looking through the scope.
The bead of the blue light beam kissed Munnol’s drab camo-cloak like a tiny spotlight. Milo looked through the
scope viewer, seeing Munnol as a ghost of blues and shadows.
Munnol, as if sensing the beam on him, turned to look back at Milo. Through the scope, Milo saw Munnol as he
swung slowly around, his eyes hooked and slanted in his cold pale face. A second more, and those eyes became the
visor slits of a great sculpted helmet of gleaming white armour, backed by a towering crest of red feathers. Munnol’s
grey fatigues became a tight suit of blue armour that locked majestically about his huge, powerful frame. The lasgun
in his hands became a long, fluted lance weapon with a ridged, coiled pipe, silver vents and a beautiful inlay of
chased pearl and gold. Munnol became quite the most frightening thing Milo had ever seen.
“Oh my Emperor…” he breathed. “They’re eldar!”
Lilith’s brigade broke from the gorge into a fan of lowlands where the jungle had vanished under sculptural folds of
mud which had slid in vast curls down the slopes and obliterated everything in their path. The going was slower, the
troops wading waist-deep in ochre slime in some places. Above the roar of the storm, the forward scouts could now
pick up the sounds of massed combat from the valley beyond. Hashes of light backlit the hilltop, and it wasn’t
lightning.
Gaunt ordered battle readiness via an encrypted vox-burst, marshalling the Volpone heavyweights up the flank of
the hill under Gilbear’s lead and funnelling the Ghosts in two detachments led by Lerod and Corbec along the edge
of the mud slip below. Gaunt and Lilith moved at the front of Corbec’s band.
Mkoll had led them true. Round the curve of the hill, they got their first sight of the mound and its ruin — and the
massed forces of the enemy surrounding it. Even prepared by Mkoll’s description, Gaunt found the scale was
immense. Thousands of enemy troops, some with heavy weapons, were swarming the mound’s slopes and
bombarding the great, dark edifice with a force stone had no right to resist. The entire scene was a flickering mess of
fire-flashes and explosions. The wet air was pungent with blood and thermite.
The Guardsmen were engaging before they realised it. Gilbear’s Bluebloods had come into the rear positions of
enemy heavy weapons emplacements, and the crews were turning, startled, counter-attacking with close-quarter side
arms. A moment later, and both detachments of Ghosts were hemmed in by Chaos units that peeled back from the
main assault to face this surprise rear contact. Las-fire and bolt rounds seared a miserable light-streak criss-cross
over the smooth mud flats.
Blasting with his bolt pistol, Gaunt saw a tiny opportunity: break and fall back now, or become locked
irrevocably into the fighting.
He saw Gilbear’s unit spill down the rise and fall upon the enemy weapon stations with a ferocious and admirable
grace, overwhelming and slaughtering them in a matter of a minute or two. The powerful hellguns, supported by two
grenade launchers and a plasma rifleman, ripped into the hindquarters of the guncrews’ position and cut them down.
Gilbear haughtily voxed his success as his men took over control of the enemy weapons, turning missile launchers
and field artillery on the ranks of the chaos army beyond. The Volpone Tenth Elite were damn good, Gaunt had to
admit. Rotation training on all combat disciplines meant that they could take a gun post and then man that gun as
surely and deftly as if they were dedicated artillery troops.
Gaunt knew the moment had gone. To break now would have left the Volpone alone. His choice was made for him.
Battle was truly joined and there would be no respite.
The twin prongs of the Ghosts punched into the rear of the besiegers. Gilbear, tactically astute, turned the aim of
captured guns down the turn of the valley and covered the Ghost push, creating huge breaks in the enemy’s makeshift
flanking manoeuvre. Shells whistled down under Gilbear’s direction, pin-point accurate, throwing ribbons of mud,
strands of foliage and pieces of Chaos troopers into the air not twenty metres in front of the advancing Ghosts.
The fighting was close range and white hot. Incredibly, but for a few grazes and glancing burns, Gaunt found his
men suffered no casualties.
Within five minutes of first contact, the Imperials had cut a wedge into the enemy rearguard, made up half a
kilometre of ground and slaughtered upwards of two hundred enemy troops, at no mortal cost.
Gilbear held the line as long as he could, but there came a point, mutually agreed between him and Gaunt over the
vox-link, when the separation of the two small Imperial advances would become too great.
When the signal was given, the Bluebloods mined the gun emplacements and pushed on, scything a double-time
advance to swing themselves in behind the Ghosts. Limed explosions, staggered and staggering, set off the
emplacement munitions and excavated a new valley where a small plateau had been.
Into the heat now, on the lower slopes of the mound, the Imperial expedition force slicing a break in the foe as a
spearhead formation, Ghosts to the right, Volpone to the left, with Gaunt and Corbec at the tip.
Gaunt knew the Tanith fought well, but he had never seen them discharge themselves so determinedly, so
brilliantly. In his heart, he couldn’t believe that this was a simple response to his motivational speech. They were
fighting for something, something deep in theirs hearts, something that would not be denied.
“For Tanith! For Tanith, bless her memory!” he heard Corbec yelling as he advanced.
The cry, as it was taken up by Ghosts all around him, prompted a deep, emotional response in Gaunt. It shocked
him. They were indeed fighting for Tanith… not for some memory or for a sense of vengeance. They were fighting
for the love of their homeworld, of the misty cities, the darkling woodlands, the majestic seas.
He knew this because he felt it too. He had spent all of a day on Tanith before the fall, and most of that inside the
dim anterooms of the Elector’s palace at Tanith Magna. But it felt as if it had been his home, something he had grown
to love through years of upbringing, something that was still attainable…
With Corbec and two other Ghosts, he was the first to reach a defence ditch on the lower slopes of the mound
where superior numbers of Chaos filth were turning from their assault of the ruin to repel the hind attack. Gaunt led
with his chainsword, slicing the enemy apart. It seemed like he was las-proof. All opposing shots went wild. The joy
of Tanith sang in his heart.
He dropped into the ditch, cutting the first aggressor before him open down the middle, then swung the whining
blade left to decapitate another. In his other hand, his bolt pistol blasted down the ditch, blowing the legs off two
charging ghouls with fixed bayonets. His bolter clacked empty. Corbec was beside him, bellowing, blasting with his
lasgun at figures who fell and squirmed and fled down the narrow defile. To the other side, Troopers Yael and Mktea
fought hand to hand with silver daggers, passionate, furious. Beyond them, Bragg, blasting with his autocannon over
the ditch top.
Gaunt threw his bolter and his sword aside and grabbed the firing handles of an enemy storm-bolter with a belt
feed set into the lip of the ditch. The massive gun was set on flak-board, with wire tie-downs to prevent the tripod
from skating. Gaunt thumbed the trigger and swept the shuddering gun left and right, decimating the ranks of enemy
advancing up the hill above him.
He felt a hand on his arm. Lilith was beside him, her face pale, her eyes full of tears.
“What?” he barked, continuing to fire.
“Can’t you feel it? You’re swept up in the storm-magic too!”
He released his hands and the drum belt rattled round on auto-feed. “Magic?”
“The web of deceit I spoke of… it’s enflamed all your men, the Bluebloods too. It’s tearing at my mind! Gaunt…!”
Involuntarily, he held her. She pushed him off after a second. “I’m all right! All right!”
“Lilith!”
“Whatever… whoever… it is up there in the ruin, they’re preying on our emotions.”
“What do you mean?”
“I… I think they want all the help they can get, Gaunt! They’ve woven a psychic spell through the storm that makes
us… makes us respond by touching our deepest desires! For your Ghosts, this is Tanith… a Tanith where it’s still
possible to win and save the world! For the Bluebloods, it’s Ignix Majeure, where they lost after a desperate fight!
But Ibram… it’s killing me! So strong, so powerful!”
Gaunt fought to catch his breath. “W-why me? Why Tanith?”
“What?” she asked, wiping her puffy eyes.
“I’m not Tanith, but the will inside me responded that way. Why aren’t I fighting for some great cause in my own
life? Why have I been living and breathing Tanith in my waking dreams all this while?”
She smiled, simply and painfully, her perfect face lit by the fire-flashes around them. “Don’t you know it, Ibram?
Tanith is your cause, no matter if you were born there or not. You’ve devoted your service and life to these men, to
the memory of their world.
“The fate of Tanith consumes you, as it does them, and though you’re not a true son of the forests, this magic plays
on your deepest urges! You’re a Ghost, Ibram Gaunt, whether you know it or not! You’re not just their master, you’re
one of them!”
Gaunt pulled off his cap and wiped brow-sweat back into his cropped hair. He was panting, painfully high on
adrenaline. “This is all false?” he began.
“We’re being used. Manipulated. Driven to fight by something that touches our deepest causes.”
“Then… in the Emperor’s name, if it helps us kill the Chaos scum, let’s not deny it! Let’s use it!” Gaunt cued his
micro-bead and opened a channel to his force. “Sixty men against ten thousand! The stuff of legends! Push on! Push
on, for Tanith and for Ignix Majeure! Take the slope and make for the ruin!”
At the head of his wave of Bluebloods, Gilbear heard the call and screamed into the night as he emptied yet
another power-pack out through the glowing muzzle of his hellgun. The Volpone took the rise, scattering enemy
before them.
Lerod, who now thought himself truly immortal, led his detachment up the mound, stampeding over the panicking,
splintering waves of Chaos filth.
Corbec, with Bragg firing solid lines of destruction from his heavy weapon at his side, pushed the other Ghost
band up between the prongs. To either side of the Imperial advance, a hundred thousand soldiers of the foe swarmed
and regrouped. But the sixty or so Imperials cut a line up through them that wouldn’t be denied.
Years later, painstakingly reconstructing the details of this assault from patchy data collected at the time, Imperial
tacticians on London would be utterly unable to account for the success of the action. Even given the surprise nature
of the assault, from the rear, there was no sense to the data. Simple statistics should have had Gaunt’s expeditionary
force cut down to the last man, at most a half kilometre from the ruin. The tacticians would factor in charismatic
leadership, tactical insight, luck… and still there was no mistake. Gaunt’s men should have been entirely slaughtered
long before they reached the ruin.
But that was not the case. Gaunt drew his forces, without the loss of a single man, up to the walls of the ruin
perhaps thirty minutes after they had first engaged the back of the enemy positions. They had cut through a legion of
the foe who outnumbered them ten thousand to one, and attained a target area the enemy had been trying to force its
way into for hours. They slew, approximately, two-point-four thousand soldiers of the enemy.
Eventually, after a prolonged analytical study, the tacticians would decide that the only explanation could be that
there were no enemy units on the field that day. It was all an illusion. Gaunt had mounted an assault through open,
undefended ground. Only then did the computations and the statistics and the possibilities match up.
None of them could admit that this wasn’t the case. And so, perhaps the greatest and most spectacular success of
Macaroth’s great Crusade, out-classed and out-numbered but still successful, was deleted from the Imperial Annals
as a phantom engagement. Such is the fate of true heroism.
There was a door: a tall, pointed arch of stone faced with stone, in the side of the smooth flank of the ruin. Gaunt
grouped his force around it as relentless firepower strafed up at them from the muddled but regrouping legions of the
enemy.
Gilbear intended to mine the door in the hope of blowing it open, though, as Corbec pointed out, the scorch marks
on the stone facing seemed to indicate that the enemy had tried that more than once and failed.
They were about to argue the point some more when the door opened. Brin Milo stood there, looking out at them,
flanked by Caffran and a spectacularly grim eldar warrior with a red plume set behind his white helmet.
The storm flashed above, still furious and wild.
“You’ve come this far,” Milo said. “Now let’s finish this.”
Sealed inside the onyx walls of the Way-Place, Gaunt and his force heard the low wailing of eldar mourners,
remorsefully singing the last songs of closure.
Muon Nol faced Gaunt for a long while, until Gaunt saluted and held out his hand.
“Ibram Gaunt.”
Nothing more need be said, Gaunt thought.
Muon Nol looked at the proffered hand, then slung Uliowye over his shoulder and clasped it.
He spoke, a bewildering slither of otherworldly language.
“You’ve just been formally worshipped as a fellow warrior,” Lilith said, stepping up. Muon Nol turned his huge
gaze to look at her.
“I am Lilith, of the Imperial Inquisition,” she stated. Muon Nol, a head taller than even Gilbear, paused and
nodded slowly.
Gaunt looked round sharply at the inquisitor. “We’re not getting anywhere fast,” he hissed. “Does anyone here
speak eldar?”
“I do,” Lilith said, but Muon Nol spoke simultaneously.
“There is no need,” he said in melodiously accented Low Gothic. “I understand. You must follow me now. The
farseer-lord awaits.”
“Fine…” Gaunt began.
Muon Nol stepped back. “No. Not you. The female.”
Lord Eon Kull felt the wash and burn of the Chaos hosts as they assaulted the ruin around him. Fuehain Falchior had
begun to rattle in her rack again.
The door of the Inner Place slid open and Muon Nol entered, escorting a cowled human female, a hulking
stormtrooper in grey and gold, and a human male in a long coat and cap.
Muon Nol bowed. Lilith did likewise. Gilbear and Gaunt remained upright.
Eon Kull spoke, perfectly using the clumsy low Gothic he had once wasted a brief year mastering.
“I am Eon Kull Farseer. My enchantments have brought you into this. I make no apologies. The Way must be
closed to the Dark and I will use all my powers to accomplish that.”
Muon Nol took a step forward, gesturing to indicate Lilith. “My lord… this female is called Lilith, in the human
tongue. Is that not a sign?”
“Of what?”
“Of purpose… lord?”
Eon Kull seemed about to answer, as if he too recognised the symbolic coincidence. But then he slumped against
the side of his throne, blood leaking from under the seal of his helmet.
“My lord!”
Gaunt reached him first, pulling off the tall helm and cradling the pale skull of the worn-out, dying Eldar farseer in
his gloved hands.
“I can send for medics… healers,” he began.
“No… n-no… no time. No purpose to it. I want to die, Gaunt human. The Way must be closed before Chaos can
corrupt it.”
Holding Eon Kull, Gaunt looked up hopelessly at Lilith. She came and took his place, embracing the frail eldar’s
head and body.
“That’s what the Chaos forces are here on Monthax for, isn’t it, farseer lord?”
“You speak truth. This Way has stood open for twenty-seven centuries. Now the enemy have found it and through it
they will invade Dolthe craftworld. For the sake of Dolthe, for the living souls of the eldar, this Way must be closed.
For this great purpose I have conjured you. For this great purpose, my aspect warriors have given their all and their
last.”
“All of this… some trick of a stinking alien scumbag…” Gilbear growled.
Gaunt launched himself forward, bringing down Muon Nol before the enraged eldar could splinter Gilbear to
pieces with his shrieker cannon.
Gaunt got up off the aspect warrior and strode across the onyx room to face Gilbear.
“What? What did I say that was so bad?” Gilbear asked, a second before Gaunt’s fist laid him out unconscious on
the flag stones.
“Ibram!” Gaunt turned as Lilith cried out. She was cradling Eon Kull in her arms. Gaunt rushed to her, with Muon
Nol at his elbow, but there was no mistaking the signs.
Farseer Eon Kull, the Old One, was dead.
They placed his frail remains on the floor.
“We are lost, then,” Muon Nol said. “Without the farseer, we can no longer conjure the pacts with the warp and
close the Web. Dolthe will die as surely as Farseer Eon Kull.”
“Lilith can do it,” Gaunt said suddenly.
Muon Nol and Lilith looked at him.
“I know you can, and I know you want to. That is why you’re here, Lilith.”
“What are you talking about, Ibram?” she said.
“You’re not the only one with pull, the only one who can chase records and dig out hushed files. I did my research
on you as surely you did mine. Lilith Abfequarn… psyker, inquisitor, black notation rating.”
“God of Terra,” she smiled. “You’re good, Ibram.”
“You don’t know how good. The Black Ships singled you out when they found you. Daughter of a planetary
governess whose world edged the stamping grounds of the eldar. She died in one of their raids. You swore… first to
destroy them and then, as you grew, to understand the strange species that had robbed you so. And that’s why you
wanted this mission: you craved a chance to contact your nemesis. You want this, Lilith.”
She sank and sat hard on the onyx floor beside Eon Kull’s corpse.
Muon Nol lifted her up. “You are Lileath. You can do what the farseer would have done. Close the gate, Lileath.
Take us back to Dolthe forever.”
Lilith looked at Gaunt. Gaunt noticed for the last time how beautiful she was. “Do it… That is why you came.”
She took his shoulders, hugged him briefly and then pulled away to look into his face.
“It would have been interesting, commissar.”
“Fascinating, inquisitor. Now do your job.”
They said goodbye. Mkoll said goodbye to Liloni, Caffran said goodbye to Laria. The Ghosts said goodbye to Tanith
and the Blueblood bade farewell to Ignix Majeure.
A cold light, hard as vacuum, bright as diamond, pierced the sky above the ruin, evaporating the storm in little
more than a minute. Seventy-five percent of the astropaths aboard the Imperial fleet elements in orbit suffered
catastrophic seizures and died. The others passed out. The psychic backwash of the event was felt light years away.
The spell ended as the Way finally closed. The eldar left Monthax forever, and took Lilith back to Dolthe
craftworld with them. She closed the Way, as she had, perhaps, been born to do. Once the Way was shut, closelytargeted
orbital bombardments incinerated the massed forces of the enemy.
The jungles of Monthax burned.
Once the bombardment stopped, Gaunt led his Ghosts and the Volpone unit back towards the line. The storm was
dead and pale sunlight fell on them. The world around them was a wasted desert of baked mud and burned
vegetation.
The only man Gaunt had lost in the final assault had been Lerod, taken by a remarkably lucky glancing shot off the
roof of the eldar temple.
Ibram Gaunt slept for a day and half in his command cabin. His fatigue was total. He woke when Raglon brought him
directives from Lord Militant General Bulledin, orchestrating the Imperial withdrawal from Monthax.
He put on his full dress uniform, adjusted his cap and went out into the smoky sunlight to oversee the Tanith as they
packed up and prepared for evacuation. The vast troop transports cast flickering shadows across the lines as they
came in, droning down from high orbit.
Gaunt could sense the feeling of the men: weariness, aches, the joy of a great victory somehow dulled and strange.
He found Milo, sat alone on the side steps of the abandoned infirmary, cleaning his lasgun. Gaunt sat down next to
him.
“Odd the way things work out, isn’t it?” Milo said bluntly.
Gaunt nodded.
“I think it was a good thing, though.”
“What?”
“The eldar trick. Good for us. Good for the Ghosts.”
“Explain?” Gaunt asked.
“I know how I feel. I’ve heard the men talking too. This was Tanith again for us, for you too, I think. Deep down I
think we all hate the fact we never got a chance to fight for Tanith. Some are blatant about it. Men like… like Major
Rawne. Others can understand why we had to leave, why you ordered us out. But they don’t like it.”
He looked around at Gaunt.
“Just a mind trick maybe, but for a few hours there forty or so of us got to fight for Tanith, got to fight for our
world, got the chance to do what we’d always been cheated out of. It felt good. Even now I know it was a lie, it still
feels good. It… exorcised a few ghosts.”
Gaunt smiled. The boy’s pun was awful, but he was right. The Ghosts of Tanith had laid their own ghosts to rest
here. They would be stronger for it.
And so would he, he realised. They were his ghosts after all.


A WARHAMMER 40,000 NOVEL
NECROPOLIS
Gaunt’s Ghosts - 03
Dan Abnett
IT IS THE 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor has sat immobile on the Golden
Throne of Earth. He is the master of mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might of
his inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with power from the Dark Age of Technology. He
is the Carrion Lord of the Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he may never truly
die.
YET EVEN IN his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the
daemon-infested miasma of the warp, the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the
psychic manifestation of the Emperor's will. Vast armies give battle in his name on uncounted worlds. Greatest
amongst his soldiers are the Adeptus Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades in
arms are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the
tech-priests of the Adeptus Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely enough to
hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants - and worse.
TO BE A man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live in the cruellest and most bloody
regime imaginable. These are the tales of those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and understanding, for in the grim dark future
there is only war. There is no peace amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter of
thirsting gods.
After the victories at Monthax and Lamacia, Warmaster Macaroth drove his forces swiftly along the trailing edge
of the Sabbat Worlds cluster and turned inwards to assault the notorious enemy fortress-worlds in the Cabal
system. Successful conquest of the Cabal system was a vital objective in the Imperial crusade to liberate the
entire Sabbat Worlds group. To achieve this massive undertaking, the warmaster sent the line ships of his
Segmentum Pacificus fleet forward in a pincer formation to begin the onslaught, while assembling and reforming
his enormous Imperial Guard reserves ready for ground assault.
“It took close to eight months for the troop components to convene at Solypsis, thousands of mass-conveyance
transports carrying many million Imperial Guardsmen. There were many delays, and many minor skirmishes to
settle en route. The Pragar regiments were held up for six weeks engaging the remnants of a Chaos legion on
Nonimax, and a warp-storm forced the Samothrace and Sarpoy troop ships to remain at Antioch 148 for three
whole months. However, it is the events that took place on the industrial hive-world of Verghast that are of
particular interest to any student of Imperium military history…”
—from A History of the Later Imperial Crusades
ONE
ZOICA RISING
“The distinction between Trade and Warfare is seen only by those who have no experience of either.”
—Heironymo Sondar, House Sondar, from his inaugural address
The klaxons began to wail, though it was still an hour or more to shift-rotation.
The people of the hive-city paused as one. Millions of eyes checked timepieces, faltered in their work, looked up
at the noise. Conversations trailed off. Feeble jokes were cracked to hide unease. Young children began to cry.
House soldiery on the Curtain Wall voxed in confirmation and clarification requests to the Main Spine command
station. Line supervisors and labour-stewards in the plants and manufactories chivvied their personnel back into
production, but they were uneasy too. It was a test, surely? Or a mistake. A few moments more and the alarms would
shut down again.
But the klaxons did not desist.
After a minute or so, raid-sirens in the central district also began keening. The pattern was picked up by
manufactory hooters and mill-whistles all through the lower hive, and in the docks and outer habs across the river
too. Even the great ceremonial horns on the top of the Ecclesiarchy Basilica started to sound.
Vervunhive was screaming with every one of its voices.
Everywhere, hazard lamps began to spin and flash, and secondary storm shutters cycled down on automatic to
block windows. All the public-address plates in the city went black, erasing the glowing lines of weather,
temperature, exchange-rate data, the local news and the ongoing output figures. They fuzzed darkly for a few seconds
and then the words “Please stand by” scrolled across all of them in steady repeats.
In the firelit halls of Vervun Smeltery One — part of the primary ore processing district just west of the Spoil —
rattling conveyers laden with unprocessed rock shuddered to a halt as automatic safeties locked down. Above the
main smelter silo, Plant Supervisor Agun Soric got up from behind a file-covered desk and crossed to the stainedglass
window of his bureau. He looked down at the vast, halted plant in disbelief, then pulled on his work-jacket and
went out onto the catwalk, staring at the thousands of milling workers below. Vor, his junior, hurried along the walk,
his heavily booted feet ringing on the metal grill, the sound lost in the cacophony of hooters and sirens.
“What is this, chief?” he gasped, coming close to Soric and pulling the tubes of his dust-filter from his mouthdamp.
Soric shook his head. “It’s fifteen thousand cubits of lost production, that’s what the gak it is! And counting!”
“What d’you reckon? A malfunction?”
“In every alert system in the hive at once? Use your brain! A malfunction?”
“Then what?”
Soric paused, trying to think. The ideas that were forming in his mind were things he didn’t really want to
entertain. “I pray to the Emperor himself that this isn’t…”
“What, chief?”
“Zoica… Zoica rising again.”
“What?”
Soric looked round at his junior with contempt. He wiped his fat, balding brow on the back of his gold-braided
cuff. “Don’t you read the news-picts?”
Vor shrugged. “Just the weather and the stadium results.”
“You’re an idiot,” Soric told him. And too young to remember, he thought. Gak, he was too young himself, but his
father’s father had told him about the Trade War. What was it, ninety years back, standard? Surely not again? But the
picts had been full of it these last few months: Zoica silent, Zoica ceasing to trade, Zoica raising its bulwarks and
setting armaments up along its northern walls.
Those raid-sirens hadn’t sounded since the Trade War. Soric knew that as a bare fact.
“Let’s hope you’re right, Vor,” he said. “Let’s hope it’s a gakking malfunction.”
* * *
In the Commercia, the general mercantile district north of the Main Spine, in the shadow of the Shield Pylon, Guilder
Amchanduste Worlin tried to calm the buyers in his barter-house, but the sirens drowned him out. The retinues were
leaving, gathering up servant trains and produce bearers, making frantic calls on their vox-links, leaving behind
nothing: not a form-contract, not a promissory note, not a business slate and certainly none of their funds.
Worlin put his hands to his head and cursed. His embroidered, sleet-silk gown felt suddenly hot and heavy .
He yelled for his bodyguards and they appeared: Menx and Troor, bull-necked men in ivory-laced body-gloves
with the crest of Guild Worlin branded on their cheeks. They had unshrouded their laspistols and the velvet shroudcloths
dangled limply from their cuffs.
“Consult the high guild data-vox and the Administratum links!” Worlin spat. “Come back and tell me what this is,
or don’t come back at all!”
They nodded and went off, pushing through the packs of departing traders.
Worlin paced back into his private ante-room behind the auction hall, cursing at the sirens to shut up. The very last
thing he needed now was an interruption to trade. He’d spent months and a great deal of Guild Worlin funds securing
mercantile bonds with Noble House Yetch and four of the houses ordinary. All of that work would be for nothing if
trade — and income — went slack. The whole deal could collapse. His kin would be aghast at such losses. They
might even strip him of his badge and remove his trading rights.
Worlin was shaking. He crossed to the decanter on the wrought-brass stack table and was about to pour himself a
hefty shot of ten-year-old joiliq to calm his brittle mood. But he paused. He went to his desk, unlocked a drawer with
the geno-key that he kept around his wrist on a thin chain and took out the compact needle pistol.
He checked it was primed and armed, then fetched the drink. He sat back on his lifter throne, sipping his liquor
and holding his badge of credit — the mark of his rank — gazing at the Worlin crest and its bright ornament. He
waited, the weapon in his lap.
The klaxons continued to wail.
At carriage station C4/a, panic had begun. Workers and low-classers who had ventured into the mercantile slopes for
a day’s resourcing began to mob every brass-framed transit that trundled in along the cogged, funicular trackway.
Carriages were moving out towards the Outer Habs and the Main Spine alike, overloaded, some doors only half
closed.
Crowds on the platforms, shivering at each yelp of the alarms, were getting fractious as more and more fully laden
transits clattered through without stopping. A slate-seller’s stall was overturned in the press.
Livy Kolea, hab-wife, was beginning to panic herself. A body-surge of the crowd had pushed her past the pillars
of the station atrium. She’d kept a firm grip on the handles of the child-cart and Yoncy was safe, but she’d lost sight
of Dalin.
“My son! Have you seen my son?” she asked, imploring the frenzied crowd that washed around her. “He’s only
ten! A good boy! Blond, like his father!”
She grabbed a passing guilder by the sleeve. A rich, lavish sleeve of painted silk.
“My son—” she began.
The guilder’s bodyguard, menacing in his rust-coloured mesh, pushed her aside. He jerked the satin shroud off the
weapon in his left hand, just briefly, as a warning, escorting his master on. “Take the hand off, gak-swine,” his voxenhanced
larynx blurted gruffly, without emotion.
“My son—” Livy repeated, trying to push the child-cart out of the flow of bodies.
Yoncy was laughing, oblivious in his woollen wrap. Livy bent down under the segmented hood of the cart to
stroke him, whispering soft, motherly words.
But her mind was racing. People slammed into her, teetering the cart and she had to hold on to keep it upright. Why
was this happening — to her — now? Why was it happening on the one day a month she carriaged into the lower
Commercia to haggle for stuff? Gol had wanted a new pair of canvas mittens. His hands were so sore after a shift at
the ore face.
It was such a simple thing. Now this! And she hadn’t even got the mittens.
Livy felt tears burst hot onto her cheeks.
“Dalin!” she called.
“I’m here, mam,” said a little voice, half hidden by the klaxons.
Livy embraced her ten-year-old son with fury and conviction, like she would never let go.
“I found him by the west exit,” a new voice added.
Livy looked up, not breaking her hug. The girl was about sixteen, she reckoned, a slut from the outer habs, wearing
the brands and piercings of a hab-ganger.
“He’s all right though.”
Livy looked the boy over quickly, checking for any signs of hurt. “Yes, yes he is… He’s all right. You’re all right,
aren’t you, Dalin? Mam’s here.”
Livy looked up at the outhab girl. “Thank you. Thank you for…”
The girl pushed a ringed hand through her bleached hair.
“It’s fine.”
The girl made Livy uneasy. Those brands, that pierced nose. Gang marks.
“Yes, yes… I’m in your debt. Now I must be going. Hold on to my hand, Dalin.”
The girl stepped in front of the cart as Livy tried to turn it.
“Where are you going?” she asked.
“Don’t try to stop me, outhab! I have a blade in my purse!”
The girl backed off, smiling. “I’m sure you have. I was just asking. The transits are packed and the exit stairs are
no place for a woman with a kid and a cart.”
“Oh.”
“Maybe I could help you get the cart clear of this press?”
And take my baby… take Yoncy for those things scum like you do down in the outer habs over the river!
“No! Thank you, but… No!” Livy barked and pushed the gang-girl aside with the cart. She dragged the boy after
her, pushing into the thicket of panic.
“Only trying to help,” Tona Criid shrugged.
The river tides were ebbing and thick, ore-rich spumes were coursing down the waters of the Hass. Longshoreman
Folik edged his dirty, juddering flatbed ferry, the Magnificat, out from the north shore and began the eight-minute
crossing to the main wharves. The diesel motor coughed and spluttered. Folik eased the revs and coasted between
garbage scows and derelicts, following the dredged channel. Grey estuary birds, with hooked pink beaks, rose from
the scows in a raucous swirl. To the Magnificat’s port side, the stone stilts of the Hass Viaduct, two hundred metres
tall, cast long, cold shadows across the water.
Those damn sirens! What was that about?
Mincer sat at the prow, watching the low-water for new impediments. He gestured and Folik inched the ferry to
starboard, swishing in between the trash hulks and the river-sound buoys.
Folik could see the crowds on the jetty. Big crowds. He grinned to himself.
“We’ll make a sweet bundle on this, Fol!” Mincer shouted, unlooping the tarred rope from the catheads.
“I think so,” Folik murmured. “I just hope we have a chance to spend it…”
* * *
Merity Chass had been trying on long-gowns in the dressing suites of the gown-maker when the klaxons first began to
sound. She froze, catching sight of her own pale, startled face in the dressing mirror. The klaxons were distant,
almost plaintive, from up here in mid-Spine, but local alarms shortly joined in. Her handmaids came rushing in from
the cloth-maker’s vestibule and helped her lace up her own dress.
“They say Zoica goes to war!” said Maid Francer.
“Like in the old times, like in the Trade War!” Maid Wholt added, pulling on a bodice string.
“I have been educated by the best tutors in the hive. I know about the Trade War. It was the most bloody and
production-costly event in hive history! Why do you giggle about it?”
The maids curtseyed and backed away from Merity.
“Soldiers!” Maid Wholt sniggered.
“Handsome and hungry, coming here!” squealed Maid Francer.
“Shut up, both of you!” Merity ordered. She pulled her muslin fichu around her shoulders and fastened the pin.
Then she picked up her credit wand from the top of the rosewood credenza. Though the wand was a tool that gave
her access to her personal expense account in the House Chass treasury, it was ornamental in design, a delicate lace
fan which she flipped open and waved in front of her face as the built-in ioniser hummed.
The maids looked down, stifling enthusiastic giggles.
“Where is the gown maker?”
“Hiding in the next room, under his desk,” Francer said.
“I said you’d require transportation to be summoned, but he refuses to come out,” Wholt added.
“Then this establishment will no longer enjoy the custom of Noble House Chass. We will find our own transport,”
Merity said. Head high, she led her giggling maids out of the thickly carpeted gown-hall, through drapes that drew
back automatically at their approach and out into the perfumed elegance of the Promenade.
Gol Kolea put down his axe-rake and pulled off his head-lamp. His hands were bloody and sore. The air was black
with rock-soot, like fog. Gol sucked a mouthful of electrolyte fluid from his drinking pipe and refastened it to his
collar.
“What is that noise?” he asked Trug Vereas.
Trug shrugged. “Sounds like an alarm, up there somewhere.” The work face of Number Seventeen Deep Working
was way below the conduits and mine-head wheels of the mighty ore district. Gol and Trug were sixteen hundred
metres underground.
Another work gang passed them, also looking up and speaking in low voices.
“Some kind of exercise?”
“Must be,” Trug said. He and Gol stepped aside as a laden string of ore-carts loaded with loose conglomerate
rattled by along the greasy mono-track. Somewhere nearby, a rock-drill began to chatter.
“Okay…” Gol raised his tool and paused.
“I worry about Livy.”
“She’ll be fine. Trust me. And we’ve got a quota to fill.”
Gol swung his axe-rake and dug in. He just wished the scrape and crack of his blade would drown out the distant
sirens.
Captain Ban Daur paused to button his double-breasted uniform coat and pull the leather harness into place. He
forced his mind to be calm. As an officer, he would have been informed of any drill and usually he got wind even of
surprise practises. But this was real. He could feel it.
He picked up his gloves and his spiked helmet and left his quarters. The corridors of the Hass West wall-fort were
bustling with troop details. All wore the blue cloth uniform and spiked helmets of the Vervun Primary, the city’s
standing army. Five hundred thousand troops all told, plus another 70,000 auxiliaries and armour crews, a mighty
force that manned the Curtain Wall and the wall forts of Vervunhive. The regiment had a noble heritage and had
proved itself in the Trade War, from which time they had been maintained as a permanent institution. When foundings
were ordered for the Imperial Guard, Vervunhive raised them from its forty billion-plus population. The men of
Vervun Primary were never touched or transferred. It was a life-duty, a career. But though their predecessors had
fought bravely, none of the men currently composing the ranks of Vervun Primary had ever seen combat.
Daur barked out a few commands to calm the commotion in the hallway. He was young, only twenty-three, but tall
and cleanly handsome, from a good mid-Spine family and the men liked him. They seemed to relax a little, seeing
him so calm. Not that he felt calm.
“Alert duty stations,” Daur told them. “You there! Where’s your weapon?”
The trooper shrugged. “Came running when I heard the — Forgot it… sir…”
“Go back and get it, you dumb gak! Three days’ discipline duty — after this is over.”
The soldier ran off.
“Now!” cried Daur. “Let’s pretend we’ve actually been trained, shall we? Every man of you knows where he
should be and what he should be doing, so go! In the hallowed name of the Emperor and in the service of the beloved
hive!”
Daur headed uptower, pulling out his autopistol and checking its clip.
Corporal Bendace met him on the steps. Bendace had a data-slate in one hand and a pathetic moustache on his
upper lip.
“Told you to shave that off,” Daur said, taking the slate and looking at it.
“I think it’s… dashing,” Bendace said soulfully, stroking it.
Daur ignored him, reading the slate. They hurried up the tower as troopers double-timed down. On a landing, they
passed a corporal tossing autoguns from a wall rack to a line of waiting men.
“So?” asked Bendace as they started up the final flight to the fort-top.
“You know those rumours you heard? About Zoica going for another Trade War?”
“That confirms it?”
Daur pushed the slate back into Bendace’s hands with a sour look. “No. It doesn’t say anything. It’s just a
deployment order from House Command in the Spine. All units are to take position, protocol gamma sigma. Wall and
fort weapons to be raised.”
“It says that?”
“No, I’m making it up. Yes, it says that. Weapons raised, but not armed, until further House Command notice.”
“This is bad, isn’t it?”
Daur shrugged. “Define ‘bad’?”
Bendace paused. “I—”
“Bad is your facial growth. I don’t know what this is.”
They stepped out onto the windy battlements. Gun crews were raising the trio of anti-air batteries into position,
hydraulic pistons heaving the weapon mounts up from shuttered hardpoints in the tower top. Autoloader carriages
were being wheeled out from the lift-heads. Other troops had taken up position in the netted stub-nests. Cries and
commands flew back and forth.
Daur crossed to the ramparts and looked around. At his back, the vast, smoke-hazed shape of the Main Spine itself
rose into the sombre sky like a granite peak, winking with a million lights. To his right lay the glitter of the River
Hass and the grimy shapes of the docks and outer habs on the far bank. Below him, the sweeping curve of the vast
adamantine Curtain Wall curved away east to the smoke pall of the ore smelteries and the dark mass of the Spoil
hunkered twenty-five kilometres further round the circumference of the city skirts.
To the south, the slum-growths of the outer habs outside the wall, the dark wheel-heads and gantries of the vast
mining district, and the marching viaducts of the main southern rail link extended far away. Beyond the extremities of
the hive, the grasslands, a sullen, dingy green, reached to the horizon. Visibility was medium. Haze shimmered the
distance. Daur cranked a tripod-mounted scope around, staring out. Nothing. A pale, green, unresolvable nothing.
He stood back and looked around the ramparts. One of the anti-air batteries on the wall-top below was only half
raised and troopers were cursing and fighting to free the lift hydraulics. Other than that, everything and everyone was
in place.
The captain took up the handset of the vox-unit carried by a waiting trooper.
“Daur to all Hass West area positions. Reel it off.”
The junior officers sang over the link with quick discipline. Daur felt genuine pride. Those in his command had
executed gamma sigma in a little under twelve minutes. The fort and the western portion of the wall bristled with
ready weapons and readier men.
He glanced down. The final, recalcitrant anti-aircraft battery rose into place. The crew gave a brief cheer that the
wind stole away, then pushed the autoloader-cart in to mate with it.
Daur selected a new channel.
“Daur, Hass West, to House Command. We are deployed. We await your orders.”
In the vast Square of Marshals, just inside the Curtain Wall, adjacent to the Heironymo Sondar Gate, the air shook
with the thunder of three hundred tank engines. Huge Leman Russ war-machines, painted in the blue livery of Vervun
Primary, revved at idle in rows across the square. More vehicles clanked and ground their way in at the back of the
square, from the marshalling sheds behind the South-Hive barracks.
General Vegolain of the First Primary Armoured, jumped down from his mount, buckling on his leather headshield,
and approached the commissar. Vegolain saluted, snapping his jack-booted heels together.
“Commissar Kowle!”
“General,” Kowle replied. He had just arrived in the square by staff limousine, a sinister black vehicle that was
now pulling away behind its motorbike escorts. There were two other commissars with him: Langana and the cadet
Fosker.
Kowle was a tall, lean man who looked as if he had been forced to wear the black cap and longcoat of an Imperial
commissar. His skin was sallow and taut, and his eyes were a disturbing beige.
Unlike Langana and Fosker, Kowle was an off-worlder. The senior commissar was Imperial Guard, seconded to
watch over the Vervunhive standing army as a concession to its continued maintenance. Kowle quietly despised his
post. His promising career with the Fadayhin Fifth had foundered some years before and against his will he had been
posted to wet-nurse this toy army. Now, at last, he tasted the possibility of acquiring some glory that might rejuvenate
his lustreless career.
Langana and Fosker were hive-bred, both from aspiring houses. Their uniform showed their difference from
Kowle. In place of his Imperial double-eagle pins, they wore the axe-rake symbol of the VPHC, the Vervun Primary
Hive Commissariat, the disciplinary arm of the standing army. The Sondar nobility was keen on discipline. Some
even said that the VPHC was almost a secret police force, acting beyond the reach of the Administratum, in the
interests of the ruling house.
“We have orders, commissar?”
Kowle scratched his nose absently and nodded. He handed Vegolain a data-slate.
“We are to form up at company strength and head out into the grasslands. I have not been told why.”
“I presume it is Zoica, commissar. They wish to spar with us again and—”
“Are you privy to the inter-hive policies of Zoica?” Kowle snapped.
“No, comm—”
“Do you then believe that rumour and dissent is a tool of control?”
“No, I—”
“Until we are told it is Zoica, it is no one. Is that clear?”
“Commissar. Will… will you be accompanying us?”
Kowle didn’t reply. He marched across to Vegolain’s Leman Russ and clambered aboard.
Three minutes later, the Sondar Gate opened with a great shriek of hydraulic compressors and the armoured
column poured out onto the main south highway in triple file.
“Who has ordered this alarm?” The question came from three mouths at once, dull, electronic, emotionless.
Marshal Gnide, strategic commander of Vervun Primary and chief military officer of Vervunhive, paused before
replying. It was difficult to know which face to answer.
“Who?” the voices repeated.
Gnide stood in the softly lit, warm audience hall of the Imperial House Sondar, at the very summit of the Main
Spine. He wished he’d taken off his blue, floor-length, braid-trimmed greatcoat before entering. His plumed cap was
heavy and itched his brow.
“It is necessary, High One.”
The three servitors, limp and supported only by the wires and leads that descended from the ceiling trackways,
circled him. One was a thin, androgynous boy with dye-stained skin. Another was a voluptuous girl, naked and
branded with golden runes. The third was a chubby cherub, a toy harp in its pudgy hands, swan-wings sutured to its
back. All of them lolled on their tubes and strings, blank-eyed.
Servos whined and the girl swung closer to Gnide, her limp feet trailing on the tiled floor.
“Are you my loyal marshal?” she asked, in that same flat monotone, that voice that wasn’t hers.
Gnide ignored her, looking past the meat puppet — as he called it — to the ornamental iron tank in the far corner
of the room. The metal of the tank was dark and tarnished with startlingly green rust. A single round porthole looked
out like a cataract-glazed eye.
“You know I am, High One.”
“Then why this disobedience?” the youth asked, atrophied limbs trembling as the strings and leads swung him
round.
“This is not disobedience, High One. This is duty. And I will not speak to your puppets. I asked for audience with
House Ruler Salvador Sondar himself.”
The cherub swung abruptly round into Gnide’s face. Sub-dermal tensors pulled its bloated mouth into a grin that
was utterly unmatched by its dead eyes.
“They are me and I am them! You will address me through them!”
Gnide pushed the dangling cherub aside, flinching at the touch of its pallid flesh on his hand. He stalked up the low
steps to the iron tank and stared into the lens port.
“Zoica mobilises against us, High One! A new Trade War is upon us! Orbital scans show this to be true!”
“It is not called Zoica,” the girl said from behind him. “Use its name.”
Gnide sighed. “Ferrozoica Hive Manufactory,” he said.
“At last, some respect,” rattled the cherub, bobbing around Gnide. “Our old foes, now our most worthy trading
partners. They are our brethren, our fellow trade-hive. We do not raise arms against them.”
“With respect!” snapped Gnide. “Zoica has always been our foe, our rival. There were times last century they
bettered us in output.”
“That was before House Sondar took the High Place here. Vervunhive is the greatest of all, now and ever after.”
The youth-puppet began to drool slackly as it spoke.
“All Vervunhive rejoices that House Sondar has led us to domination. But the Legislature of the Noble houses has
voted this hour that we should prepare for war. That is why the alarms were sounded.”
“Without me?” the girl hissed, flatly.
“As it is written, according to the customs, we signalled you. You did not reply. Mandate 347gf, as ratified by
your illustrious predecessor, Heironymo, gives us authority to act.”
“You would use old laws to unseat me?” asked the cherub, clattering round on its strings to stare into Gnide’s face
with dead eyes.
“This is not usurpation, High One. Vervunhive is in danger. Look!” Gnide reached forward and pressed a dataslate
against the lens of the tank.
“See what the orbitals tell us! Months of silence from Zoica, signs of them preparing for war! Rumours, hearsay
— why weren’t we told the truth? Why does this spring down on us so late in the day? Didn’t you know? You, allseeing,
all-knowing High One? Or did you just decide not to tell us?”
The puppets began to thrash and jiggle, knocking into Gnide. He pushed them off.
“I have been in constant dialogue with my counterpart in Ferrozoica Hive Manufactory. We have come to enjoy the
link, the companionship. His Highness Clatch of House Clatch is a dear friend. He would not deceive me. The
musterings along the Ferrozoica ramparts were made because of the crusade. Warmaster Slaydo leads his legions
into our spatial territories; the foul enemy is resisting. It is a precaution.”
“Slaydo is dead, High One. Five years cold on Balhaut. Macaroth is the leader of the crusade now. The beloved
Guard legions are sweeping the Sabbat Worlds clean of Chaos scum. We rejoice daily that our world, beloved
Verghast, was not touched.”
“Slaydo is dead?” the three voices asked as one.
“Yes, High One. Now, with respect, I ask that we may test-start the Shield. If Zoica is massing to conquer us, we
must be ready.”
“No! You undermine me! The Shield cannot be raised without my permission! Zoica does not threaten! Clatch is
our friend! Slaydo is not dead!”
The three voices rose in a shrill chorus, the meat puppets quivering with unknowable rage.
“You would not have treated Heironymo with such disrespect!”
“Your brother, great one as he was, did not hide in an Awareness Tank and talk through dead servitors… High
One.”
“I forbid it!”
Gnide pulled a glittering ducal seal from his coat. “The Legislature expected this. I am empowered by the houses
of Vervunhive, in expediency, to revoke your powers as per the Act of Entitlement, 45jk. The Legislature commends
your leadership, but humbly entreats you that it is now taking executive action.” Gnide pushed the puppets aside and
crossed to a brass console in the far wall. He pressed the centre of the seal and data-limbs extended like callipers
from the rosette with a machined click. Gnide set it in the lock and turned it.
The console flashed into life, chattering runes and sigils scrolling down the glass plate.
“No!” screeched the three voices. “This is insubordination! I am Vervunhive! I am Vervunhive!”
“You are dethroned for the good of the city,” Gnide snapped. He pressed the switches in series, activating the
power generators deep beneath the hive. He entered the sequences that would engage the main transmission pylon
and bring the Shield online.
The cherub flew at him. He batted it away and it upturned, tangling in its cords. Gnide punched in the last
sequence and reached for the activation lever.
He gasped and fell back, reaching behind him. The girl puppet jerked away, a long blade wedged in her dead
hands. The blade was dark with blood.
Gnide tried to close the gouting wound in his lower back. His knees gave and he fell. The girl swung in again and
stuck the blade through his throat.
He fell, face down, soaking the carpet with his pumping blood.
“I am Vervunhive,” the girl said. The cherub and youth repeated it, dull and toneless.
Inside the iron tank, bathed in warm ichor and floating free, every organ and vessel connected by tubes to the lifebank,
Salvador Sondar, High Master of Vervunhive… dreamed.
The salt grasses were ablaze. All along the scarp rise, Vervun Primary tanks were buckled and broken amid the
rippling, grey grass, fire spilling out of them. The air was toxic with smoke.
Commissar Kowle dropped clear of the command tank as flames within consumed the shrieking Vegolain and his
crew. Kowle’s coat was on fire. He shed it.
Enemy fire pummelled down out of the smoke-black air. A Vervun tank a hundred metres away exploded and sent
Shockwaves of whickering shrapnel in all directions.
One shard grazed Kowle’s temple and dropped him.
He got up again. Crews were bailing from burning tanks, some on fire, some trying to help their blazing fellows.
Others ran.
Kowle walked back through the line of decimated hive armour, smelling the salt grass as it burned, thick and
rancid in his nose.
He pulled out his pistol.
“Where is your courage?” he asked a tank gunner as he put a round through his head.
“Where is your strength?” he inquired of two loaders fleeing up the slope, as he shot them both.
He put his muzzle to the head of a screaming, half-burned tank captain and blew out his brains. “Where is your
conviction?” Kowle asked.
He swung round and pointed his pistol at a group of tank crewmen who were stumbling up the grassy rise towards
him from their exploded tank.
“Well?” he asked. “What are you doing? This is war. Do you run from it?”
They hesitated. Kowle shot one through the head to show he meant business.
“Turn! Face the foe!”
The remaining crewmen turned and fled towards the enemy positions. A tank round took them all apart a second
later.
Missiles strafed in from the low, cloudlike meteorites and sundered twenty more tanks along the Vervun formation.
The explosions were impossibly loud. Kowle was thrown flat in the grass.
He heard the clanking as he rolled over. On the far rise, battletanks and gun platforms painted in the ochre livery
of Zoica rolled down towards him.
A thousand or more.
Out of nowhere, just before nightfall, about a half-hour after the klaxons had stopped yelping, the first shells fell,
unexpected, hurled by long-range guns beyond the horizon.
Two fell short on the southern outer habs, kicking up plumes of wreckage from the worker homes.
Another six dented the Curtain Wall.
At Hass West, Daur yelled to his men and cranked the guns around. A target… give me a target… he prayed.
Dug-in Zoica armour and artillery, hidden out in the burning grasslands, found their range. Shells began to drop
into the hive itself.
A gigantic salvo hit the railhead at Veyveyr Gate and set it ablaze. Several more bracketed the Vervun Primary
barracks and atomised over a thousand troopers waiting for deployment.
Another scatter pounded the northern habs along the river. Derricks and quays exploded and shattered into the
water. In mid-stream, Folik’s over-laden ferry was showered with burning debris. Folik tried to turn in the current,
yelling for Mincer. Another shell fell in the water nearby, drenching the screaming passengers with stinking river
water. The ferry wallowed in the blast-wake.
Two more dropped beyond the Magnificat, exploding and sinking the ferry Inscrutable, which was crossing back
over the tideway. The Inscrutable went up in a shockwave that peppered the water with debris. Diesel slicks burned
on the choppy surface.
Folik pulled his wheel around and steered out into mid-channel. Mincer was screaming something at him, but the
wail of shells drowned him out.
A staggered salvo rippled through the mining district, flattening wheel heads and pulley towers.
Deep below the earth, Gol Kolea tried to dig Trug Vereas out of the rock fall that had cascaded down the main lift
chute of Number Seventeen Deep Working. All around, miners were screaming and dying.
Trug was dead, his head mashed.
Gol pulled back, his hands slick with his friend’s blood. Lift cables whipped back down the shaft as cages
smashed and fell. The central access had collapsed in on them.
“Livy!” he screamed up into the abyss. “Livy!”
Vor was obliterated by the first shell that came through the roof of Vervun Smeltery One. Agun Soric was thrown flat
and a chip of ore flying from the blistering shock took out his left eye forever.
Blood from cuts to the scalp streamed down his face. He rolled over in the wreckage and then was lifted off the
floor by another impact that exploded the main conveyor. A piece of oily bracket, whizzing supersonically across the
work-floor, decapitated one of the screaming workers nearby and embedded itself in the meat of Soric’s thigh. He
howled, but his cry was lost in the tumult and the klaxons as they started again.
Livy Kolea looked around as the glass roof of the transit station fell in explosively and she tried to shield Yoncy
and Dalin.
Glass shrapnel ripped her to pieces, her and another sixty civilians. The aftershock of hot air crisped the rest.
Dalin was behind a pillar and remained miraculously unscathed. He got up, crunching over the broken glass, calling
for his mother.
When he found what was left of her, he fell silent, too stunned for noise.
Tona Criid took him up in her arms.
“S’okay, kid. S’okay.” She pulled over the upturned cart and saw the healthy, beaming face of the baby smiling
back at her. Tona took up the infant under one arm and dragged the boy behind her.
They were twenty metres from the south atrium when further shells levelled carriage station C4/a.
* * *
Menx and Troor escorted Guilder Worlin through the chaos of the Commercia. Several barter-houses to their west
were ablaze and smoke clogged the marketways. The closest carriage station with links to the Main Spine was C4/a,
but there was a vast smoke plume in that direction. Menx redirected their route through the abandoned Guild Fayk
barter-house and headed instead for C7/d.
By the time they reached the funicular railway depot, Guilder Worlin was crying with rage. The bodyguard thought
it was for fear of his life, but Worlin was despairing for purely mercantile reasons. Guild Worlin had no holdings in
weaponshops, medical supplies, or food sources. War was on them and they had no suitable holdings to exploit.
They entered the carriage station, but the place was deserted. A few abandoned possessions —purse-bags, pictslates
and the like — were scattered on the platform. The transit indicator plate overhead was blank.
“I want,” Worlin hissed through clenched teeth, “to return to the Main Spine now. I want to be in the family house,
to be inside the Spine hull. Now!”
Troor looked down the monotrack and turned back. “I see lights, sir. A transit approaches.”
The carriage train pulled into the station and stopped on automatic for a moment. The twin cars were packed full
of Low — and Mid-Spine citizens.
“Let me in!” Worlin banged on the nearest door-hatch. Terrified faces looked out at him silently.
Shells walloped into the Commercia behind him. Worlin pulled out his needle pistol and opened fire through the
glass. The passengers, trapped like rats in a cage, screamed as they were slaughtered.
After a brief hesitation, Worlin’s bodyguard joined him, slaughtering twenty or more with their unshrouded guns.
Others fled the carriage, screaming. Pulling out bodies, the guards hauled Worlin into the carriage, just as the
automatic rest period finished and the transit resumed. It engaged on the cog-track and slowly began to crank up into
the hull of the main Spine.
“House Sondar, deliver us from evil,” hissed Worlin, sitting down on a gilt bench seat and rearranging his robes.
Menx and Troor stood nearby, uneasy and unnerved.
Worlin gazed out of the window of the rising transit, apparently not seeing the smoke blooms and fireballs rising
across the city below — just as he didn’t seem to see the pools of blood that washed around his shoes.
Volleys of shells and long-range missiles pounded into the southern face of the Main Spine. Despite the thick
adamantine and ceramite sheath, some even punctured the skin of the great structure. A glassmaker’s showrooms on
the Mid-Spine Promenade took a direct hit and blew out, filling the air with whizzing splinters of lead-crystal and
ceramite wall debris. Fifty house ordinary nobles and their retainers were shredded or burnt as they hurried in panic
down the plush walkways.
Just a few steps beyond the glassmaker’s, shielded from the out-blast by a row of pillars, Merity Chass continued
to stride on, her weeping maids huddled behind her.
“This is not happening,” Merity Chass told herself. “This is not happening.”
Multiple shell hits lit up the Curtain Wall around Hass West. An antiaircraft post, the one that had been slow rising
from its pit, was blown away and its ignited munitions tore a bite out of the wall.
Captain Daur traversed his guns and looked for an enemy. The grasslands were blank. Long-range weapons were
reaching them, utterly beyond their power to resist.
If they even had the authority.
“Captain Daur to Marshal Gnide! Give us permission to arm! Give the order! Marshal, I’m begging you!”
In the dull quiet of the audience chamber, Gnide’s corpse was lifted away from the carpet by the slack puppets. The
desperate voice of Daur and hundreds of other field commanders bayed unheard from his vox-plug.
Three shells hit Hass West Fort in series. The first ignited the battery munitions. The second vaporised Corporal
Bendace and sixteen other troopers. The third, a crippling Shockwave, splintered the tower top and caused a vast
chunk of rampart to slump away in a torrent of stone, dust and fire. Captain Daur fell with it, caught in the avalanche
of rockcrete and ceramite. Fie had still not received the order to arm from the House Command.
In the Iron Tank, Salvador Sondar, High Master of Vervunhive, drifted and dreamed. The satisfaction he had gained
from asserting his mastery over that fool Gnide was ebbing. There was something akin to pain creeping into him
across the mind-impulse links that hooked his cortex into the data-tides and production autoledgers of the hive. He
rolled over in the warm suspension fluid and accessed the information currents of the Legislature and the guilds. The
hive was… under attack.
He retuned his link to confirm. Even when the information was verified, it seemed wrong. There was a
discrepancy that his mind could not resolve. Vervunhive was attacked. Yet this should not be.
He needed time to think.
Petulantly, he activated the Shield generators.
TWO
AN OCHRE WAVE
“Be it one man or one million, the enemy of the Imperium must be treated the same and denied with all
diligence.”
—Pius Kowle, Imperial Commissar, from his public education leaflets
Dusk came early at the end of the first day. The darkening sky was stained darker still by the smoke plumes rising
from the hive and its outer districts, and by the great ashen pall looming over the salt grasslands to the south. Thick,
fire-swollen, black smoke boiled up from the mining district and the heavy industrial suburbs south of the Curtain
Wall, and a murky brown flare of burning fuel rose from ruptured tanks and silos on the Hass docks to the north of the
river. Other threads of white, grey and mauve smoke rose from hundreds of smaller, individual fires.
The bombardment continued, even though the Shield had been raised. A vast, translucent umbrella of field-energy
extended out from the great Shield Pylon in the central district and unfurled itself in a dome that reached down to
anchor substations inside the Curtain Wall. Thousands of shells and missiles burst against it every minute, dimpling
the cloudy energy and making it ripple and wobble like green gelatine. From inside the Shield, it looked as if the
green sky was blossoming with fire.
Observers on the southern wall, most of them soldiers of Vervun Primary, trained their scopes and magnoculars
through the rising smoke and fires in the outer habs and saw the distant grass horizon flickering with a wall of flame
seventy kilometres wide. The grass smoke — ash-grey but streaked with black from individual infernos down below
the skyline — tarnished the southern sky in the dying light. Bright, brief flashes underlit the horizon smoke, hinting at
the fierce armour battle taking place just out of sight. No communications had been received from General Vegolain’s
armoured column for two hours.
Now that the Shield was up to cover the main hive, the outer habs, the heavy industry sectors and the mining
district south of the wall were taking the worst of it. Unprotected, they were raked mercilessly by long-range
artillery, siege mortars and incendiary rockets. As the light faded, the southern out-hive suburb became a dark,
mangled mass, busy with thousands of fires, drizzled by fresh rains of explosives. From the Wall, it was possible to
see the shock waves radiating from each major strike, gusting the existing fires.
The population of the southern outer habs was in the order of nine million, plus another six million workers who
dwelt in the main hive but travelled out to work the industrial district and the mines. They had little shelter. Some hid
in cellars or underground storage bays and many died entombed in these places. Penetrator shells dug them out
explosively like rats, opening the makeshift shelters to the sky. Others were sealed forever under thousands of tonnes
of collapsed masonry.
There were a few deep-seated, hardpoint shelters in the southern habs, reserved for suburban officials and minor
area legislators. These shelters had been dug ninety years before during the Trade War and few were in decent
working order. One group of hab officials spent two hours trying to find the correct rune-code to let them into their
assigned shelter and they were incinerated by a rocket before they could get the vault door open. Another group, a
few blocks north, found themselves fighting off a terrified mob that wanted to gain access to a shelter too. A VPHC
officer, leading the group, opened fire with his handgun to drive the frantic citizens away while the ranking official, a
mill-boss with guild connections, opened the vault.
They sealed themselves in, twenty-three rank-privileged citizens of authority level three or less, in a bunker
emplacement designed to shelter two hundred. They all died of suffocation by the following dawn. The air systems,
long in need of overhaul and regular maintenance, failed the moment they were switched on.
By nightfall, millions of refugees were clogging the main arterial routes into the hive, bottled up at Sondar Gate, at
the Hass West road entry and the ore works cargo route. They were even trying to gain access via the rail-link tunnel
at Veyveyr Gate, but the terminal inside had been turned into an inferno in the first wave of bombing and the gate was
blocked.
Others still, in desperate, slowly moving lines, many laden with possessions or injured family members, dared the
Spoil and the mud flats, and some made it in through the as-yet-undamaged railhead at Croe Gate.
The Hass West Fort was still burning and the top of it was cascading debris down both inside and outside the
Wall. However, the Wall and the Hass Gate itself were still firm and streams of refugees made it into the hive via the
Hass Road under supervision of Vervun Primary troopers manning the damaged emplacement. But access was still
slow and a column of people, two kilometres long and growing, tailed back from the Hass Gate into the dark,
vulnerable to the ceaseless onslaught pummelling the outer habs. Thousands died before they could pass into shelter,
as shells landed in the thick queue, lust as many, perhaps eight or nine thousand, fled the traffic stream northwest and
made progress into the river shores.
The last kinking stretch of shield wall north of Hass West Fort, known as the Dock Wall, reached out into the midwaters
and there was no way through. Some perished in the treacherous mud-flats; others tried to swim the Hass
itself and were lost by the hundreds. Most cowered in the stinking slime under the dock wall, wailing plaintively up
at the soldiers two hundred metres above them on the wall top, men who could do nothing to help them. Almost two
thousand people remained penned in that filthy corner of the Wall through the first days of the conflict, too afraid to
try the route back round the wall to Hass Gate. Starvation, disease and despair killed them all within four days.
The Sondar Gate was open and the main tide of refugees sought entry there. The Vervun Primary troops, focussed
en masse to control the crowd, admitted the people as quickly as possible, but it was miserably slow going and the
column of people stretched three kilometres back into the burning outer habs.
Many of the tail-enders, certain they would be dead before ever reaching the safety of the hive’s Shield, turned
around and headed out into the salt grasslands by the hundreds. None were ever seen alive again.
In the Square of Marshals, just inside the Heironymo Sondar Gate, the hive troopers struggled to manage the
overwhelming influx of citizens. Forty percent of the arrivals were injured.
Captain Letro Cargin had been given charge of the operation and inside an hour he was close to despair. He had
first tried to contain the refugees in the vast ceremonial square itself, but it quickly became filled to overflowing.
Some family groups were climbing the pedestals of the statues around the square to find somewhere to crouch. There
was group singing: work anthems of the hive or Imperial hymns. The massed, frail voices — set against the constant
thunder of the bombardment and the crackle of the Shield above — unnerved his men.
The Vervun Primary barracks northwest of the square, which had taken hits in the first stage of the attack, was still
blazing but under control. Cargin voxed House Command repeatedly until he was granted special permission from
the guilds to open the Anko Chemical Plant west of the square and the guild manufactories to the east, to house the
overspill. Quickly, these new areas became overfilled too. The guilds had issued particular instructions as to how
much of those areas could be used or even entered. Cargin’s men reported fights breaking out as they tried to deny
access to certain areas. Shots were fired over the heads of the crowd. Compared to the onslaught they had weathered
outside, the small arms of the troops were insignificant and the House Guard found themselves pushed back deeper
into the industrial areas, trying to accommodate the intake. Most troopers were profoundly unwilling to shoot at their
own citizens. In one instance, an angry junior officer actually fired into the encroaching crowd, killing two. He and
his six man squad were torn apart by a pack of smoke-blackened textile workers.
Cargin voxed frantically for supplies and advice. By eight in the evening, new orders were being issued from
House Command and the Legislature, designating refugee assembly areas, hastily arranged in the inner worker habs
south of the Pylon and the Commercia. Asylum traffic from the Sondar Gate, Hass Gate and, to a lesser extent, the
Croe Gate was now choking the southern sectors of the hive. Some of the House Legislature, meeting in
extraordinary session in the Main Spine, argued that it was the hive’s duty to house the outer hab population. Others
were simply afraid that with the main southern arterials choked, they would never be able to mobilise their armies.
Six noble houses also volunteered aid, which began to be shipped by carriage route down to the Square of Marshals
and the main city landing field where the refugees from Hass Gate were also congregating.
It was a start, but not enough. Cargin began to wonder if the upper echelon of the hive really understood the scale
of the problem. The Imperial mottoes, hive slogans and other messages of calming propaganda flashing up on the
public-address plates did little to deaden the general panic.
Cargin had angry, frightened citizens by the thousands, most stone-deaf from concussion shock, many burned naked
by the blasts, many more dying and stretcher-bound. Short of closing the Gate itself, he had no way to stem the flow.
His three thousand men were vastly outnumbered by the mass.
Cargin was voxed to the north corner of the square. There he found a field station had been set up by medics from
some inner hab infirmary. Hundreds of the injured had been laid out on the stone paving. Doctors and orderlies
dressed in crimson gowns and masks tended to them.
“Are you Cargin?”
Cargin looked round. A gowned and masked figure was addressing him. She pulled off her mask to reveal an
appealing, heart-shaped face. The eyes, though, were hard and bewildered.
“Yes… doctor?”
“Surgeon Ana Curth, Inner Hab Collective Medical Hall 67/mv. I’ve been given authority here We are trying to set
up a triage station under the carriage stands over there, but the flow is too great.”
“I’m doing my best, surgeon,” he said flatly. He could see tractor units and trucks lining the barrack road,
headlamps blazing and engines gunning, moving in to transport those in need of immediate surgery to the main
infirmary facilities in the inner habs and Low Spine.
“Likewise,” said Curth without humour. The air smelled of blood and burned flesh and was full of piteous
shrieking. “The medical halls are already full of wounded from the inner city. There were huge casualties from the
start of the raid, before the Shield was ignited.”
“I don’t know what to say,” Cargin shrugged. “I’ve followed my orders and allowed the incoming to flow out of
the square into adjacent areas. There seems to be no end to them. My observers on the wall-top say the queue outside
is still three kilometres long.”
The surgeon looked at the blood-spattered paving for a moment, her hands on her hips. “I…” she began, then
paused. “Can you get me a vox link? I’ll try sending to my superiors. The Commercia has been evacuated and there
is vast floorspace inside it. I doubt they’ll grant permission, but I’ll do what I can.”
Cargin nodded. He called his vox-officer over and told him to attend the surgeon. “Whatever you can do is better
than nothing,” he told her.
The tank roared and bounced over the trampled grass hillocks, heading north at full throttle, its turret reversed to spit
shells into the firefields behind it, into the invisible enemy at its heels.
The night sky was ablaze. Scorching trails of rockets and shrieking shells tore overhead, heading for the hive.
Commissar Kowle crouched in the turret of the running tank, shouting orders to fire to the gun-crew in the lit space
below him. The vox-link was down. He couldn’t reach House Command. He had forty-two tanks left out of the
armoured column of more than four hundred and fifty that had left the Sondar Gate that afternoon. No ranking Vervun
Primary armour officer was left alive. Cadet Fosker was also dead.
Kowle had command now. Using the VPHC Commissar Langana as his second officer, he had managed to regroup
the shattered remnants of the tank force and swing it back towards the city. It felt like retreat, but Kowle knew it was
a sound tactical decision. They were facing an ochre wave out there on the grass-flats, a stupendous Zoica armoured
front, pushing in through three salients. Only in his days with the Imperial Guard, during major offensives like
Balhaut and Cociaminus, had he seen anything like this scale of assault. And there were infantry regiments behind,
thick like locusts, following the armour.
Kowle didn’t even want to think about the size of the opposition just now. It was… unbelievable. It was
impossible. An ochre wave — that’s all he could see, the tide of ochre-painted machines rolling over his forces,
crushing them.
He tried the vox again, but the enemy was jamming all bands. Shells rained down amongst the retreating Vervun
tanks. At least two blew out as munitions ignited, sending tank hulls end-over-end in fireballs, spraying track
segments out like shattered teeth.
The driver was calling him over the intercom. “Ahead, sir!”
Kowle swivelled round. Vervunhive was in sight now, the great luminous blister of green energy flickering on the
skyline like a giant mushroom cloud, glowing in the night. Kowle grabbed his scope and saw the blackened, burning
mass of the outer habs fast approaching. A persistent rain of explosives was still dropping into them.
“Kowle to column!” he spat into his inter-tank vox. “Form up and follow me in down the Southern Highway. We
will re-enter the city through the Sondar Gate. Let none shirk, for I will find them wanting and find them!”
He smiled at his last words. Even now, under a storm of fire, he could still turn a good, disciplinarian phrase.
The high-ceilinged, gilt-ornamented Hall of the Legislature, high and secure in the upper sections of the Main Spine,
was full of arguing voices.
Lord Heymlik Chass, noble patriarch of House Chass, sat back in his velvet-upholstered bench and glanced aside
to his aides and chamberlains.
The Legislature was full tonight. All nine noble houses were in attendance, as well as the representatives of the
other twenty-one houses ordinary, along with the drones of over three hundred guild associations and families in
their flamboyant finery. And down in the commons pit, hundreds of habitat and work-clave representatives bayed for
action.
As a scion of a noble house, Chass’ bench was in the inner circle, just above the Legislator’s dais. Vox/pict drones
mumbled and hovered along the benches like bumblebees. The Legislature Choir, told to shut up some minutes before
by Noble Croe, sat sullenly in their balcony, balling up pages of sheet music and throwing them down on the
assembly beneath. Master Jehnik, of House Ordinary Jehnik, was on his feet in the middle circle, reading from a
prepared slate and trying to get someone to listen to his fifty-five-point plan.
Chass pressed the geno-reader on the side of his hardwood stall and the plate slid open before him.
He keyed in his authority rating, touched the statement nines and wrote: Master Legislator, are we going to
debate or simply argue all night?
The words flashed up on the central plate and six other noble houses, fifteen houses ordinary and the majority of
the guild associations assented.
Silence fell.
The Master Legislator, Anophy, an ancient hunchback with a tricorn, ribboned hat, crawled to his feet from his
dais throne and began the Litany of Enfranchisement. The assembly was quiet as it was intoned. Anophy stroked his
long, silver moustache, smoothed the front of his opalescent robe and asked the assembly for points of order.
Around seventy holographic runes lit the plate display and glowed overhead via hovering repeater screens.
“Noble Anko has the floor.” There were moans from the commons pit.
Anko got up, or rather was helped up by his entourage. His raspy, vox-amplified voice rang around the hall.
“I deplore the attack on our city-hive by our erstwhile friends of Zoica. I press to vote we deny them and send
them home, tails between their legs.”
No argument there, thought Chass. Typical Anko, going for the easy vote.
Anko went on. “I wish the Legislature to back me on another matter. My plant is being overrun by indigents from
the suburbs. House officers tell me that the plant is already overwhelmed and immediate production will be
impossible. This hurts Vervunhive. I move that House Anko be allowed to eject the indigents from its premises.”
More squabbling and yelling from below.
“Noble Yetch?”
“Are we to disabuse our work population so, cousin Anko? You like them well enough when they raise your
quotas. Do you hate them now they choke your factories?”
Commotion, louder than before. Several nobles and many guilders thumped their assent sirens vigorously. Anko
sat down, his expression vile.
“Noble Chass?”
Chass rose. “I fear my cousin Anko fails to read the larger story here. Ninety years have passed since we faced
such a crisis. We face a Second Trade War. Reports are that the wave of enemy force is quite humbling to our own
defences. We have all seen how the tumult today has wounded our hive. Why, my own dear daughter barely reached
home alive.”
Sympathetic holograms flashed sycophantically from the tiers of some of the houses ordinary.
Chass continued. “If this attack inconveniences our houses, I say: Let us be inconvenienced! We have a duty to the
hive population and cousin Anko should put that bald fact before his production quota. I wish to frame more
important questions to this Legislature. One: Why did this attack come as a surprise? Two: Should we signal the
Imperium for assistance? Three: Where is the High Master, what did he know of this and why was the Shield ignited
so late?”
Now the roaring grew. Assent sigils lit up all around. The Legislator screamed for order.
“Noble Chass,” a voice said, lilting through the huge hall. “How would you wish me answer that?”
The place fell silent. Escorted by ten impassive, uniformed officers of the VPHC, High Master Salvador Sondar
entered the Hall.
He was blind in one eye and limping badly. His flesh was blistered and charred, and his clothes were tattered. But
he was still plant supervisor.
Using an axe-rake as a crutch, Agun Soric bellowed as best his crisped lungs could manage, as he brought over
three hundred smeltery workers out through the northern processing ramps of Vervun Smeltery One. Most were as
soot-black as he was, the only things showing against the grime being the glistening red of wounds or the white of
fresh dressings.
That and the workers’ white, fear-filled eyes.
They carried their injured with them, some on makeshift stretchers, some in carriers made of tied sacking, some
pushed in ore-barrows.
Soric stomped around and looked back with his one good eye. Vervun Smeltery One and parts of the surrounding
ore plants were burning furiously. Chimney stacks collapsed in the heat, sending up white cinders against the yellow
flames. The Veyveyr Rail Terminal, to the west, was also torching out.
He heard shouting and disputes from the concourse below him and he hobbled down, pushing his way through the
rows of men and women from his plant.
A dozen Vervun Primary soldiers were stopping the survivors’ advance down transit channel 456/k into the inner
habs. A VPHC officer was leading them.
“We need to get in there,” Soric said, stomping up to the commissariat officer. Even with one eye, Soric could see
the twitchy, frantic light in the young VPHCer’s eyes.
“Orders from Main Spine, old man,” the Commissar told him. “Low hab is choked with refugees. No more may be
admitted. You camp here. Supplies will come in time.”
“What’s your name?” Soric asked.
“Commissar Bownome.”
Soric paused, leaned awkwardly on his crutch, and wiped the ash from his supervisor’s badge with a hawk of
spit. He held it up so the uniformed man could see. “Soric, plant supervisor, Smeltery One. We’ve just been bombed to
gak and my workers need access to cover and treatment. Now, not in time.”
“There is no way through. Access is denied. Make your people comfortable here.” The troopers behind Bownome
raised their weapons as punctuation.
“Here? In a stinking street with the works burning behind us? I don’t think so. Boy, Smeltery One is the property of
Noble House Gavunda. We are all Lord Gavunda’s souls. If he hears of this—”
“I answer only to House Sondar. As should you. Don’t threaten me.”
“Where’s the gakking threat, you idiot?” Soric asked, looking round at his massing workers and getting a spirited
laugh in answer. “A one-eyed cripple like me? Let us through.”
“Aye, let us through!” bellowed a worker beside Soric. Ozmac, probably, but it was impossible to tell under the
soot. Other workers jeered and agreed.
“Do you understand what a State of Emergency is, old man?” Bownome asked.
“Understand? I’m gakking living it!” Soric blurted. “Stand aside!” He tried to push past the VPHC officer, but
Bownome pushed back and Soric fell off his crutch onto the debris-littered paving.
There were shouts of disbelief and anger. Workers surged forward. Bownome backed away, pulled out his
autopistol and fired into the approaching mass.
Ozmac fell dead and another collapsed wounded.
“That’s it! Enough! Be warned!” yelled the commissar. “You will all stay where—”
Soric’s axe-rake crutch shattered Bownome’s skull and felled him to the ground. Before any of the troopers could
react, the workers were on them like a tidal wave. All of the troopers were killed in a few seconds.
The smeltery workers gathered up their weapons. Worker Gannif handed the commissar’s pistol to Soric.
“I’ll see you right!” Soric barked. He waved for them to follow him down the transit channel.
They cheered him and moved on, at his heels, into the city.
“Marshal Gnide is dead,” High Master Sondar told the Legislature. The hall had remained silent as the High
Master’s floating throne ascended to the main dais with its stone-faced VPHC vanguard. Sondar’s throne had locked
into place above the High Legislator’s dais and the master of Vervunhive had spent a long moment looking out at the
assembly before speaking. He was dressed in regal robes, his face masked with a turquoise ceramic janus.
“Dead,” Sondar repeated. “Our hive faces a time of war — and you, noble houses, low houses, guilders, you
decide it is time to usurp my position?”
Silence remained.
Sondar’s masked visage turned to look around at the vast swoop of the tiered hall.
“We are one, or we are nothing.”
Still the nervous silence.
“I believe you think me weak. I am not weak. I believe you think me stupid. I am not that either. I believe that
certain high houses see this as an opportunity to further their own destinies.”
The High Master allowed Noble Anko to rise with a wave of his hand.
“We never doubted you, High Lord. The Trade War fell upon us so suddenly.”
You witless weakling, Chass thought. Sondar has led us to this blind and you reconcile sweetly. Where is the
fervour that had us vote to take executive action this afternoon?
“Zoica will be denied,” Sondar said. Chass watched the High Lord’s movements and saw how jerky they were.
It’s not him, he thought. The wretch has sent another servitor puppet to represent him.
“We have sent word to the Northern Foundry Collectives and to Vannick Magna. They will bolster us with
garrison troops. Our counterattack will begin in two days.”
There was delighted commotion from the commons pit and the guild tiers.
Chass rose and spoke. “I believe it is in the interests of Verghast as a whole to send to the Imperium for
assistance.”
“No,” responded Sondar quickly. “We have beaten Zoica before; we will do it again. This is an internal matter.”
“No longer,” a voice said from below. The assembly looked down at the benches where the officials of the
Administratum sat. Hooded and gowned, Intendant Banefail of the Imperial Administratum got to his feet.
“Astropathic messages have already been sent out, imploring Imperial assistance from Warmaster Macaroth.
Vervunhive’s production of ordnance and military vehicles is vital for the constant supply of the Sabbat Worlds
Crusade. The warmaster will take our plight seriously. This is a greater matter than local planetary politics, High
Lord Sondar.”
Sondar, or rather the being that represented him, seemed to quiver in his throne. Rage, Chass presumed. The
balance between hive and Imperial authority had always been delicate in Vervunhive, indeed in all the nobilities of
Verghast. It was rare for it to clash so profoundly and so visibly. Chass well knew the fundamental strategic import
of Vervunhive and the other Verghast manufactory dues to the crusade, but still the magnitude of the intendant’s
actions amazed him. The Administratum was the bureaucratic right hand of the Emperor himself, but it usually bowed
to the will of the local planetary governor.
Our plight must truly be serious, he realised, a sick feeling seeping into his heart.
Holding the infant and pulling the small boy by the hand, Tona Criid ran through the burning northern section of the
Commercia. The boy was crying now. She couldn’t help that. If they could make the docks, she could get them clear
across the river and to safely. But the routes were packed. As fast as refugees came into the hive from the south,
inhabitants were fleeing to the north.
“Where we going?” asked the boy, Dalin.
“Somewhere safe,” Tona told him.
“Who are you?”
“I’m your Aunt Tona.”
“I don’t have an aunt.”
“You do now. And so does Yancy here.”
“She’s Yancy.”
“Yeah, whatever. Come on.” Tona tried to thread them through the massing crowds that filled the transit channels
down to the docks, but they were jammed tight.
“Where are we going?” asked the kid again as they sheltered in a barter-house awning to avoid the press.
“Away. To the river” That was the plan. But with the crowds this thick, she didn’t know if it was going to be
possible. Maybe they’d be safer in the city, under the Shield.
The baby began to cry.
He couldn’t breathe. The weight and blackness upon him were colossal. Something oily was dripping into his eyes.
He tried to move, but no movement was possible. No, that wasn’t true. He could grind his toes in his army boots. His
mouth was full of rockcrete dust. He started to cough and found his lungs had no room to move. He was squashed.
There was a rattling, chinking sound above him. He could hear voices, distant and muffled. He tried to cry out, but
the dust choked him and he had no room to choke.
Light. A chink of light, just above as rubble was moved away. Rubble moved and some pieces slumped heavier on
him, vicing his legs and pelvis.
There was a face in the gap above him.
“Who’s down there?” it called. “Are you alive?”
Hoarse and dry, he answered. “My name is Ban Daur — and yes, I am alive.”
His family house was deserted. Guilder Worlin strode inside, leaving a sticky tread of blood in his footprints. His
clan was at the Legislature, he was sure. Let them go and bow and scrape to the High Lord.
He crossed the draped room to the teak trolley by the ornamental window and poured himself a triple shot of
joiliq. Menx and Troor waited in the anteroom, whispering nervously.
“Bodyguard! To me!” Worlin called as the fire of the drink warmed his body. He waved an actuator wand at the
wall plate and saw nothing but cycling scrolls of Imperium propaganda. He snapped the plate off and dropped the
wand.
His bodyguard approached. They had both shrouded their weapons again, as was the custom inside guild
households.
Worlin sat back on the suspensor couch and sipped his drink, smiling. Outside the window, the sprawl of
Vervunhive spread out, many parts of it ablaze. The green, Shield-tinted sky contorted with the constant shelling.
“You have served me well tonight,” Worlin told them.
The bodyguards paused, uncertain.
“Menx! Troor! My friends! Fetch yourselves a drink from the cart and relax! Your master is proud of you!”
They hesitated and then turned. Troor raised a decanter as Menx found glasses. As soon as they had their backs to
him, Worlin pulled the needle pistol from his robes and fired.
The first shot blew Menx’s spine out and he was flung face first into the cart, which broke under him and
shattered. Troor turned and the decanter in his hand was shattered by the second shot. The third exploded his face
and he dropped backwards onto the cart wreckage.
Worlin got up and, drink in hand, fired thirty more needles into the twisted corpses, just to be sure. Then he sat
back, sipping his drink, watching Vervunhive burn.
“The road is blocked, sir!” the tank driver yelled through the intercom to Kowle. Chasing up the Southern Highway,
through the wrecked outer habs, with shells still falling, Kowle’s column had reached the rear of the queue of
refugees tailing back from Sondar Gate.
Kowle sat up in the turret, looking ahead, taking in the sea of milling bodies before them.
Shells fell to the west and lit up the night.
Kowle dropped into the turret and said, “Drive through.”
The driver looked back at him in amazement.
“But commissar—”
“Are you denying a direct order?” Kowle snapped.
“No, sir, commissar, sir, but—”
Kowle shot him through the throat and dragged his twitching body out of the driver’s seat.
He settled into the blood-slick metal chair and keyed the intercom. “Armour column. Follow me.”
Just outhab wretches… worthless, he decided, as he drove the tank down through the masses, crushing a path to
the distant gates of Vervunhive.
THREE
A MIDNIGHT SUN
“After this, all battles will be easy, all victories simple, all glories hollow.”
—General Noches Sturm, after his victory on Grimoyr
The bombardment continued, both day and night, for two and a half weeks. By the close of the twelfth day, day and
night were barely distinguishable, so great was the atmospheric smoke-haze hanging around Vervunhive. The Shield
held firm, but the southern outhabs and manufactories became a fire-blown wasteland, fifty kilometres square. Some
shelling had also been deliberately ranged over the Shield, catastrophically wounding the unprotected northern
districts and large sections of the Hass docklands.
On the afternoon of the sixth day, Marshal Edric Croe, the Legislature’s appointed successor to Gnide, ordered the
closing of the southern hive gates. The new marshal, brother of Lord Croe of that noble house, had been a serving
major-colonel in Vervun Primary and his election was ratified by seven of the nine noble houses. Noble House Anko
— who were sponsoring their own General, Heskith Anko, for the post — voted to deny. Noble House Chass
abstained.
Marshal Croe was a pale, white-haired giant, well over two metres tall. His fierce black eyes and hard gaze were
the subject of barrack legend, but he was personally calm, quiet and inspirational, judicious in leadership and
popular with the men. The majority vote of the noble houses reflected their confidence in him — and the fact they felt
he would remain answerable to them in all circumstances. Heskith Anko, a plump, swarthy brute who approached
war politically rather than tactically, was appointed Croe’s chief of staff to appease House Anko. The two did not
get on and their furious arguments in House Command became notorious.
Croe’s decision to close the gates — at this stage there were still some half a million refugees streaming in from
the southern districts seeking sanctuary at Hass West, Sondar and Croe Gates —surprised the houses and the
Legislature as a whole. Many believed Croe had bowed to Anko’s persistent pressure. House Chass, House Rodyin
and seven houses ordinary raised a bill of disapproval and railed against the cruelty of the action. Half a million, left
to die, the gates sealed against them. “It defies humanity,” Lord Rodyin stated in the Hall of the Legislature.
In fact, Marshal Croe’s decision had been far more deeply affected by the advice of Commissar Kowle, who had
returned from the frontline with the tattered remnants of the tank divisions on the second night. Despite the losses
suffered by Vegolain’s forces, Kowle was hailed by many as a hero. He had single-handedly rallied more than thirty
vehicles and crews and pulled them back, bringing first-hand details of the enemy home to the hive. The publicaddress
plates spoke freely of his heroism and loyalty. His name was chanted in the refugee camps and in all
gatherings of citizens and workers. The title “People’s Hero” was coined and stuck. It was popularly believed he
would be decorated for his actions and many in the low classes saw him as a folk hero and a •better choice for
marshal than Croe. When, on the ninth day, food, water and energy rationing was imposed hive-wide by the
Legislature, a speech by Kowle was published on the address plates, stating how he would not only be observing
rationing strictly, but also rationing his rations. This astute piece of propaganda was Kowle’s idea and the hive
population almost universally embraced the restrictions, wishing to be “true to the People’s Hero and his selfless
behaviour.”
Croe realised quickly that he should not underestimate Kowle’s power as a popular figure. But that also meant he
couldn’t ignore Kowle’s tactical suggestions out of hand.
Croe, Anko and the assembled officer elite spent most of the fifth day in conference. They filled the briefing hall
of House Command in the Main Spine to capacity. An expectant hush fell on the assembled soldiers when Croe
asked Kowle to give his assessment of the opposition. Kowle rose to his feet, the shrapnel wound in his forehead
clearly and crudely sutured (another carefully judged move on Kowle’s part).
“I cannot overstate the magnitude of the enemy,” Kowle said, his calm voice carried around the vast, domed hall
by hovering drones. “I have seldom seen a military force of such scale. Eighty or ninety thousand armoured vehicles,
thousands of gun batteries and an infantry force behind them of several million.”
The hall was deadly quiet.
Marshal Croe asked the commissar to confirm what he had just said. During the Trade War, ninety years before,
Vervunhive had faced a Zoican army of 900,000 and barely survived.
“Millions,” Kowle repeated simply. “In all the confusion, I had little opportunity to make a head count, of course
—”
General laughter welled from the officer cadre.
“But I am sure, by disposition alone, that at least five million troops were embarked in file behind the armour
advance. And those were only the ones I could see.”
“Preposterous!” Vice Marshal Anko barked. “Vervunhive supports over forty million inhabs and from that we
raise half a million troops! Zoica is a third our size! How could they conceivably field five or more million troops?”
“I repeat only what I saw, general.” There was hubbub and murmuring in the officer ranks.
Croe had requested orbital pictures prior to the meeting, pictures he had hoped would confirm or deny these
outlandish claims. But the smoke patterns from the continued bombardment were blanketing the continent and nothing
was discernible. He had to trust Kowle’s estimation, an estimation supported by many of the armour crews he had
brought back with him.
Croe also had to consider the political and popular suicide of contradicting the People’s Hero.
Croe cleared his throat and his dark eyes fixed the commissar across the central chart table. “Your
recommendations, commissar?”
“The south gates to the hive must be closed. Sooner or later, the bombardment will stop. Then the Zoican legions
will descend on us in unprecedented force. Already they may be approaching, cloaked by the barrage, entering the
southern districts. We must make ourselves secure.”
Croe was silent. His gate officers had brought him updates on the refugee intake, the miserable statistics of the
dispossessed and wounded still pressing for entry after five days. But Kowle’s assessment was inarguable.
“The southern gates will close tomorrow at nine.” Croe hoped he would not live to regret this callous act. As a
matter of record, he would not.
While the magnitude of this decision soaked into the stunned officers, Colonel Modile requested that the Wall
Artillery be raised and armed. At the first alarm, the rampart defences had been manned and raised, but more potent
heavy guns, dormant since the Trade War, were still muzzled in deployment silos in the Curtain Wall itself. Vice
Marshal Anko reported that this work was already underway. The hive’s main firepower would be ready in two
more days and at last the city would have long range artillery to answer the bombardment.
“What of the reinforcements High Master Sondar promised?” asked an artillery officer on the front bench.
“Ten regiments of auxiliaries are moving south to us from the Northern Foundry Collectives as we speak. Vannick
Hive has promised us nine regiments within a week.”
“And the request to the Imperium?” asked Commissar Tarrian, head of the VPHC.
Croe smiled. “The will of the Emperor is with us. Warmaster Macaroth has already responded to our needs.
Ordinarily, his forces would be months away, but luck is on our side. A troop convoy from Monthax, regrouping to
reinforce the warmaster’s main crusade assault into the Cabal system, is just nine days away. It has been rerouted.
Six regiments of Guard Infantry and three armour groups are moving to us directly.”
There was general noise and some cheers.
Croe rose and hushed them all. “But that is still nine days away. We must be strong, we must be fast, we must be
secure well before then. The south gates close at nine tomorrow.”
A pitiful semblance of dawn was ebbing through the smoke cover when the Heironymo Sondar Gate shut the next
morning. Dozens of refugees scrambled through in the last few moments. Dozens more were crushed by the slamming
hydraulics. At West Hass and Croe Gates, the story was repeated. Veyveyr Gate had been immobilised by the first
night’s shelling, although the railhead fires were now out. Vervun Primary battalions, supervised by the VPHC,
erected blockades of metal wreckage to close the gate, the commissariat officers ordering the troops to fire on any
refugees still trying to gain access.
The piteous screaming and wailing of those shut outside was more than some Vervun Primary troopers could bear.
Many wrote in letters or journals that it was the worst part of the whole campaign for them. Soldiers who had
overseen the closing of the gates at the start of the sixth day, and who survived the entire ordeal, never forgot that
moment. Years after, men woke in the night, or at grey daybreak, sweating and screaming, echoing the noises they
heard from outside the walls. It was the most merciless act of the conflict so far and it would only be matched when
the gates fell open again, over a month later.
* * *
The Vervunhive Wall Artillery began firing just before noon on the eighth day. The massive silos opened their
ceramite shutters and volleyed shells back into the salt-grass hinterland where the enemy forces were massing. The
salvoes were answered with redoubled bombardment from the still-unseen foe.
On the morning of the eleventh day, troop convoys began to thread down the motor routes north of the Hass. Twenty
thousand men and nearly five thousand war machines sent out from the Northern Collectives to reinforce Vervunhive
or, more particularly, the Hass crossing which protected them from the Zoican advance. Kicking dust, the troop
carriers and tanks rumbled through the bombed outer habs and damaged manufactories, braving the bombardment that
still fell across the river from far away. Thousands of citizens had fled across the river by ferry, some trying to reach
their homes in the northern outer habs, many more seeking sanctuary in the Northern Collectives. In places, the mass
of people on the roadways slowed the NorthCol advance, but VPHC details were sent across the river by Vice
Marshal Anko to clear the way.
By the afternoon, the NorthCol regiments were moving freely down to the waiting ferries at the docks, all refugee
columns driven into the roadside fields to allow the convoys to pass. Some three hundred refugees had been
executed by the VPHC to force them to make way. The refugees jeered the NorthCol columns as they roared past.
General Xance of the NorthCol 2nd Enforcers later wrote, “This humiliating greeting did more to burn out the
NorthCol morale than a month of bitter resistance at the Wall.”
Such was the size of the NorthCol deployment and such was the capacity of the ferries that estimates suggested it
would take four days to cross them over the Hass into Vervunhive. When told of this, Marshal Croe ordered the Hass
Viaduct reopened so that rail links could resume. The rail route had been closed at the start of the bombardment.
Bypassing the ferry route, NorthCol got its forces into the hive in just under two days. Many tanks and armoured
personnel carriers actually crossed the viaduct under their own power, trundling along the rail tracks. Two divisions
of the NorthCol infantry also marched across the viaduct in a break between trains.
So far, nothing had been heard of the promised reinforcements from Vannick Hive, the great refinery collective
three thousand kilometres away to the east. Vannick had undertaken to provide nine regiments, but thus far the only
thing that had come from them was the continued fuel-oil supplies carried by the eastern pipeline. Many in
Vervunhive wondered if the forces of Zoica had reached them too.
* * *
At dawn on the fourteenth day, lights were seen in the upper atmosphere. Flaring their braking jets, Imperial Guard
dropships descended, diverted to the main lift-port at Kannak in the Northern Collective Hives. With the Shield
erected, Vervunhive’s central landing field could accept no ships.
The Imperial Guard disembarked at Kannak and then marched south on the tail of the NorthCol forces. The simple
sight of their high-orbit adjustments and blazing descents lifted the morale of the battered hive. The Guard was
coming.
The Royal Volpone 1st, 2nd and 4th deployed south from Kannak Port swiftly, using the rail link to bring themselves
deep into the hive. Marshal Croe personally greeted General Noches Sturm, the decorated victor of Grimoyr, on the
rockcrete platform of the North Spine Terminus. A large crowd of politically approved citizens cheered them, under
the watchful eyes of the VPHC.
Dressed in shimmering blue gowns, daughters of the noble houses — Merity Chass, Alina Anko, Iona Gavunda
and Murdith Croe amongst them — were sent forward to decorate Sturm and his second officers, Colonels Gilbear
and Corday, with silk floral wreathes.
Sturm was also greeted by the famous Commissar Kowle. The image of their smiling handshake was repeated on a
million public-address plates across the hive.
The 5th and 7th regiments of the Roane Deepers, under General Nash, arrived by rail later that afternoon, amid
more pantomime celebrations. Vice Marshal Anko was there to greet Nash and brass bands pomped and trumpeted
the arrival. Amid the jubilation, Nash was able to confirm that three full regiments of Narmenian Armour were offloading
from carriers at the Kannak Port landing fields and would be en route south by dawn. The crowd rose,
cheering the news, hailing the honoured Guard arrivals like they had already won the war.
The Tanith First-and-Only arrived by road, almost unnoticed, two nights later.
More than eighty matt-black troop trucks rumbled down the NorthCol highway through the northern outhabs of
Vervunhive. The canvas tilts had been removed and around thirty Tanith troopers rode in each, crouched down with
their weapons, webbing, haversacks, musette bags and bedrolls gathered to them. The bouncing trucks — sixwheelers
with large, snarling front grills and pop-eye headlamps — bore the quadruple chevron cab-marks of
NorthCol Utility Transport Division Three. Jerry cans and spare wheels were slung to their sides on sponson fittings.
A dozen outriders astride black-drab motorcycles ran along their flanks, and behind the main column came thirty
more high-cabbed eight-wheelers laden with ammunition crates and regimental supplies, as well as the numerous
cooks, armourers, mechanics, servitors and other attendant hangers-on that followed a Guard regiment on the move.
These freighters were dull yellow, the livery of the Kannak Port Cargo Union, and netting was draped over their
payloads. NorthCol soldiers in pale blue overalls and forage caps drove all the trucks, but the outriders were Tanith,
in their distinctive dark battledress. Twelve kilometres short of Vervunhive, they paused to trickle through a
checkpoint on the highway and they gained a vanguard of two dark-blue staff cars crewed by VPHC officers to lead
them in.
All the headlamps in the convoy were blazing. Night had fallen sometime, unnoticed in the thick wallow of smoke.
The only sights were the battered districts to either side, the fuzzy green glow of the hive itself — partly obscured by
the smoke — and the occasional flash and flare of long-range shells falling into the outer habs they raced through.
Brin Milo, the youngest Ghost, rode with the rest of number one platoon in the lead truck. A slender, pale youth
just now filling out with adult bulk, he had been the only non-soldier saved from the ruins of Tanith when their
homeworld was overrun and destroyed four years earlier. The commissar himself had saved his life and dragged him
from the fires that burned Tanith away.
For a long while, he had been “The Boy,” the company mascot, the piper, a little piece of Tanith innocence saved
from hell, a reminder to all of the men of the place they had lost. But six months before, during the battle for
Monthax, he had finally become a soldier too. He was proud of his issued equipment and lasgun, and he kept his
pack in better order than any of the seasoned Tanith troopers.
He sat huddled in the cramped rear-bay of the rattling truck and polished the regimental crest on his black beret
with a rag of gun-cloth.
“Milo.”
Brin looked up at Trooper Larkin opposite him. A wiry, taut-skinned man in his early fifties, Larkin was as wellknown
for his neurotic personality as his skill as the regiment’s most able sniper. The long, specialised shape of his
marksman’s lasgun was sheathed in a canvas roll at his feet. Larkin had produced his gun-scope and was training it
like a spyglass out of the truck. Larkin had once told Milo that he didn’t trust anything he hadn’t seen first through his
beloved scope.
“Larkin?”
Larkin grinned and looked back, handing the delicate brass instrument to the youth, gently. From the tiny runes
glowing on the setting dial, Milo noticed it was fixed to heat-see.
“Take a look. That way.”
Milo squinted into the scope, resting the rubberised cup to his eye-socket. He saw radiance and bewildering
crosshair markers of floating red.
“What am I looking at?”
“The hive, boy, the hive.”
Milo looked again. He realised the radiance was the yellow dome of the Shield, a vast energy field that enveloped
the unseen city-hive ahead.
“Looks big enough and ugly enough to look after itself,” he suggested.
“The same is said for so many of us,” Colonel Corbec said, holding on to the truck’s iron tilt-hoops as he edged
down to Milo and Larkin. “Velvethive is in a pretty fix, so they say.”
“That’s Vervunhive, chief,” Trooper Burun said from nearby.
“Feth you, clever-ass!” Corbec tossed back at the grinning soldier. “Feth knows I can barely remember me own
name most days, let alone where I’m supposed to be!”
First platoon laughed.
Milo held the scope up to Corbec, who waved it off with disinterest.
“I’ll meet the place that’ll kill me when I meet it. Don’t need to look for it in advance.”
Milo gave the precious scope back to Larkin, who took a final look and then slid the instrument back into its
drawstring bag.
“Seen enough, Larks?” Corbec asked, his vast arms gripping the overhead frame, his beard split by a toothy grin.
“Seen enough to know where to aim,” Larkin replied.
In the juddering load-bay of the truck three vehicles back, Third Platoon were all wagering on cards. Trooper
Feygor, a dangerous, lean man with hooded eyes, had bartered a full tarot pack from some Administratum fellow on
the troopship and he was running a game of Hearts and Titans.
Trooper Brostin, big, heavyset and saturnine, had lost so much already he was ready to wager his flamer, with the
fuel tanks, as his next lay-down.
Feygor, a thick cigar clenched between his sharp teeth, laughed at Brostin’s discomfiture and shuffled the pack
again.
As he flicked the big pasteboard cards out into hands around the grilled deck, the men of the platoon produced
coins, crumpled notes, rings and tobacco rations to add to the pot.
Trooper Caffran watched him deal. Short, young and determined, just a year older than Milo, Caffran had gained
the respect of them all during the beach assault at Oskray about a year before. Caffran disliked cards, but in Rawne’s
platoon it paid to mix in.
Major Rawne sat at the end of the truck-bay, his back to the rear wall of the cab. The Tanith second officer, he was
infamous for his anger, guile and pessimism. Corbec had likened him to a snake more than once, both physically and
in character.
“Will you play, major?” Feygor asked, his hands hesitating on the deal. Rawne shook his head. He’d lost plenty to
his adjutant in the last forty days of transit in the troopship.
Now he could smell war and idle gaming had lost its interest.
Feygor shrugged and finished the deal. Caffran picked up his hand and sighed. Brostin picked up his hand and
sighed more deeply. He wondered if wool socks would count as a wager.
The outriders raced around the speeding trucks, gunning for the destination. Sergeant Mkoll, head of the scout
platoon, crossed his bike in between two of the troop vehicles and rode down the edge-gully so he could take a look
at the hive emerging out of the smoke before them. It was big, bigger than any city he’d ever seen, bigger than the
bastion towns of Tanith certainly.
He roared ahead, passing the staff cars of the local commissariat, until he was leading the column down the
broken highway towards the docks.
A volley of shells fell into the outhabs to the east. Dorden, the grizzled, elderly chief medic of the Tanith Regiment,
heaved himself up to see. Conflagrations, bright and bitter-lemon in colour, sizzled out from the distant detonations.
The truck sashayed into a pothole and Dorden was dropped on his arse.
“Why bother?” Bragg asked.
“Say again?” asked the doctor.
Bragg shifted his position in the flat-bed uncomfortably. He was huge, bigger than any other two Ghosts put
together. “We’ll get there sooner or later; die there sooner or later. Why bother craning for a view of our doom?”
Dorden looked across at the giant. “Is the cup half-full or half-empty, Bragg?” he asked.
“What cup?”
“It’s hypothetical. Half-full or half-empty?”
“Yeah, but what cup are we talking about?”
“An imaginary cup.”
“What’s in it?”
“That doesn’t matter.”
“Does to me, doc,” Bragg shrugged.
"Well, okay… it’s got sacra in it. Half-full or half-empty?”
“How much sacra?” Bragg asked.
Dorden opened his mouth once, twice, then sat back again. “Doesn’t matter.”
Bragg pulled out a canvas bottle-flask. “There’s sacra in this,” he announced.
“Thanks, not just yet…” Dorden said, raising his hands as if in surrender.
Bragg, sat opposite him in the shuddering truck, nodded and took a long swig.
Shells wailed down, half a kilometre from the road, close enough to be uncomfortable. Dorden reached out for the
flask. “Ah well, if it’s there…”
Sergeant Varl, gripping the iron hand-loops of the truck’s flatbed with his whirring mechanical limb, tried to rouse
the spirits of his platoon by encouraging a song. A few of them joined unenthusiastically with a verse or two of
“Over the Sky and Far Away” but it soon faltered. When Varl tried another, he was told to shut up, to his face.
Sergeant Varl handled people better than most of the officers in the regiment and he knew when to reprimand and
when to back off. He’d been a dog-soldier himself for long enough.
But the mood in his platoon was bad. And Varl knew why. No one wanted this. No one wanted to get in the middle
of a hive-war.
The Magnificat was waiting at the northern docks as the column rolled in out of the firelit night. All the Hass ferries
were working full-stretch to keep the river open and convoy after convoy of military supplies and ammunition were
arriving each hour from the Northern Collectives. Troops from Vervun Primary — in blue greatcoats, grey webbing
and the distinctive spiked helmets — along with VPHC men, servitors and a good few red-robed clerks and
overseers from the Administratum were now controlling the river freight, much to the fury of the regular
longshoremen of the Dockmaster Guild. Ecclesiarchy priests had also arrived on the third or fourth day, establishing
a permanent prayer-vigil to protect the crossing and make the waterway and the viaduct safe. The hooded clergy
were grouped around a brazier at a pier end, chanting and intoning. They were there each time Folik drew the
Magnificat back to the northshore wharves. It seemed they never slept, never rested. He got into the habit of nodding
to them every time he slid the ferry in past them. They never responded. On this night run, Folik expected to take on
more supply vehicles and crates, but the house troopers running the dockside had drawn the North-Col freight trucks
aside so that troop transports could move round them and roll down the landing stages.
Folik nursed the ancient turbines into station-keeping as Mincer dropped the ramp.
The first two trucks growled and bounced aboard. Mincer directed them to their deck spaces with a pair of
dagger-lamps.
A tall, long-coated figure dropped from the cab of the first truck. He approached longshoreman Folik.
Folik was almost hypnotised by the commissar badge on the peaked cap. An awed smile creased his oil-spattered
face and he took off his wool cap out of respect.
“Sir, it’s an honour to have you aboard!”
“The pleasure’s mine. What’s your name?”
“Folik, Imperial hero, sir!”
“I… I had no idea my reputation preceded me this far. Greetings, Folik.”
“It’s a true honour, sir, to be able to transport your reinforcement column to Vervunhive.”
“I appreciate the honour, Folik. My first vehicles are aboard. Shall we proceed?”
Folik nodded and shuffled away to get Mincer to unlap the rope coils.
“Commissar Kowle himself uses our boat!” gasped Folik to his crew mate.
“Kowle? Are you sure? The People’s Hero?”
“It’s him, I tell you, in the flesh, bold as all bastardy, right here on our tub!”
At the rail, Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt gazed out from the deck of the Magnificat and smiled as he
overheard the words.
The Magnificat was in mid-stream when the eastern sky lit up brightly. There was a sucking shudder, like a windrush
over the water. The eastern horizon blazed with a midnight sun.
“What was that?” Mincer cried. A commotion rose from the troops.
Gaunt raised his hand to shield his eyes from the glare as a heat-wash rolled down the river. He knew the blasteffects
of a nuclear detonation when he saw it.
“That was the beginning of the end,” he said.
FOUR
HIVE DEATH
“Insanity! Insanity! What kind of war are we fighting?”
—Marshal Edric Croe, on hearing the news from Vannick
Kowle went directly to House Command when the news was voxed to him. He had been touring the South Curtain
and it took him almost an hour to cross the hive back to the Main Spine.
The control auditorium was a chaotic mess. Munitorum clerks, regimental aides and other junior personnel hurried
about, gabbling, panicking, relaying reports from the operators manning the main tactical cogitators banked around
the lower level of the large, circular chamber. Many Vervun Primary officers and even some VPHC troops were
clogging the place too, anxious to find out if the rumours were true.
Kowle pushed past the onlookers at the chamber door and sent many back to their stations with curt words. None
argued. They saluted and backed off from him quickly. He crossed the wide floor and then hurried up the ironwork
staircase onto the upper deck of the auditorium, where the chiefs of staff were gathered around the vast, luminous
chart table. Junior aides and technicians, many bearing important vox reports, made way for him without question.
Marshal Croe presided over the group at the chart table. His eyes were blacker than ever and he had removed his
cap, as if the weight of it was too much now. His personal bodyguard, Isak, dressed in an armoured maroon bodyglove
and carrying a shrouded gun, hovered at his shoulder. Vice Marshal Anko, wearing a medal-heavy white
ceremonial uniform, stood glowering nearby. He had been attending a formal dinner thrown by House Anko to
welcome the Volpone. Sturm and his aides stood alongside him, clad in the impressive dress uniforms of the
Volpone. Also present were Xance of NorthCol — looking tired and drawn, along with several of his senior staff —
the Narmenian Grizmund and his tank brigadiers, Nash of the Roane Deepers and his adjutants, and a dozen more
senior Vervun Primary officers, as well as Commissar Tarrian of the VPHC.
“Is it true?” Kowle asked, removing his cap but making no other formal salute.
Croe nodded, but remained silent.
Tarrian coughed. “Vannick Hive was destroyed ninety minutes ago.”
“Destroyed?”
“I’m sure you’re familiar with the concept, Kowle,” Croe said flatly. “It’s gone.”
“Zoica has levelled it. We have no idea how. They got inside the Shield somehow and used a nuclear device—”
Croe cut Anko off mid-sentence. “How is not the real issue here, vice marshal! There are any number of ‘hows’
we might debate! The real question is why.”
“I agree, marshal,” General Sturm said. “We must consider this may not have been deliberate. I’ve known
emplacements destroyed accidentally by the over-ambitious actions of those attacking. Perhaps Zoica meant to take
the hive and struck… too hard.”
“Is there any other way of striking when you use atomics?” a calm voice asked from the head of the stairs. The
group turned.
“Gaunt…” Colonel Gilbear of the Volpone hissed under his breath.
The tall newcomer wore a commissar’s cap and a long, black leather coat. He stepped towards them. His clothing
was still flecked with dust from his journey. He saluted Marshal Croe smartly.
“Colonel-Commissar Gaunt, of the Tanith First. We arrived to reinforce you just as the event occurred.”
“I welcome you, Gaunt. I wish I was happier to see you,” the white-haired giant replied respectfully. “Are your
men billeted?”
“They were proceeding to their stations when I left them. I came here as soon as I could.”
“The famous Gaunt,” Anko whispered to Tarrian.
“You mean ‘notorious’, surely?” Tarrian murmured back.
Gaunt stepped up to the chart table, pulling off his gloves and studying the display. Then he looked up and nodded
a frank greeting to Nash.
“Well met, general.”
“Good to see you, commissar,” Nash replied. Their forces had served alongside each other on Monthax and there
was a genuine, mutual admiration.
Gaunt greeted the Narmenian officers too, then looked over at Sturm, Gilbear and the other Volpone, who stared
icily at him.
“General Sturm. Always a pleasure. And Major Gilbear.”
Gilbear was about to blurt out something but Sturm stepped forward, offering his hand to Gaunt.
“Gilbear’s bravery on Monthax has earned him a colonel’s pips, Gaunt.”
“Well done, Gilbear,” Gaunt smiled broadly. He shook the general’s hand firmly.
“Good to know we have more brave, reliable Guard forces here with us, Gaunt. Welcome.”
Gaunt smiled to himself. The last time he had met Sturm in person, back on Voltemand, the pompous ass had been
threatening him with court martial. Gaunt had not forgotten that Sturm’s callous leadership had resulted in heavy
losses in the Ghost ranks from friendly artillery.
You’re only putting on this show of comradeship so you can look good in the eyes of the local grandees, Gaunt
thought, returning Sturm’s gaze with unblinking directness. You are an unspeakable wretch and I regret this place has
the likes of you to look after it. But Gaunt was a political animal as well as a combat leader, and he knew how to
play this game as well as any runt general. He said, “I’m sure our worthy brothers of the Volpone could handle this
alone.”
Sturm nodded as the handshake broke, clearly trying to work out if there had been some cloaked insult in Gaunt’s
compliment.
“From your opening remark, may we presume you believe the loss of Vannick Hive is deliberate?” Kowle stepped
forward to face Gaunt. The Imperial commissars nodded a stiff greeting to each other.
“Commissar Kowle, the People’s Hero. It’s been a long time since Bal-haut.”
“But the memories never fade,” Kowle replied.
Gaunt turned away from him. “Kowle judges my words correctly. The enemy has destroyed Vannick Hive
deliberately. Can there be any other explanation for a nuclear event?”
“Suicide,” Grizmund said. “Overrun, overwhelmed, perhaps a last act of desperation in the face of a victorious
foe. A detonation of the hive’s power plant.”
Several Vervun officers expressed dismay.
“You are new to Verghast, general, so we will not think badly of your comment,” Tarrian said softly. “But no
Verghastite would be so craven as to self-destruct in the face of the enemy. The hives are everything, praise the
Emperor. Through them and their output, we hallow and honour him. Vannick Hive would no more destroy itself than
we would.”
Many around the chart table averred.
“Brave words,” Grizmund said. “But if this hive was conquered, Emperor save us… Would you let it fall into the
hands of the enemy?”
Various voices rose in anger, but Gaunt’s words cut them to quiet. “I’m sure the general here is not questioning any
loyalties. And he may have a point, but I think it doubtful Vannick Hive succumbed to anything other than an
invader’s wrath.”
“But why?” barked Croe. “Again it comes back to this question! Invasion, conquest… I can understand those
things! But to destroy what you have fought to take? Where is the sense?”
“Marshal, we must face the darkest truth,” said Gaunt. “I have studied the data sent to me concerning this theatre. It
seems that Commissar Kowle here has reported millions of foe, an assessment that beggars belief, given the
proportional mustering capacity of a hive the size of Ferrozoica. The answer is there. Vervunhive can raise half a
million from a forty million population. Zoica can only be raising millions from a population a third the size… if the
entire population itself is being used.”
“What?” Anko barked, laughing at the idea.
“Go on, commissar,” Croe said.
“This is not a war of conquest. This is not a hive-war, a commercial spat, a new ‘Trade War’, as you refer to it.
Zoica is not massing, arming and rising to conquer and control the hive production of this planet or to subjugate its
old rival Vervunhive. They are rising to exterminate it.”
“A taint,” murmured General Nash, slowly understanding.
“Quite so,” Gaunt said. “To turn not just your potential fighting men into an army but your workers and hab
families too, that takes a zealot mindset: an infection of insanity, a corruption, a taint. The vile forces of Chaos
control Zoica, there can be no doubt. The poison of the warp has overrun your noble neighbour and set every man,
woman and child in it on a frenzied path to obliterate the rest of this world and everything on it.”

FIVE
CLOSE QUARTERS
“In war, best know what enemies are around you in your own camp, before you step out to face the foe and
wonder why you do so alone.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, from A Treatise on the Nature of Warfare
A party of local troops in blue greatcoats waited for them at the entrance to a dingy shed complex, under the starkwhite
light of sodium lamps. Their weapons were slung over their shoulders and they wore woollen caps, their
spiked helmets dangling from their webbing. They flashed the convoy in through the chain-link gate with daggerlamps.
Sergeant Mkoll was first into the compound, slewing up his motorbike on the greasy rockcrete skirt and heeling
down the kickstand. The heavy machine leaned to the left and rested, its throaty purr cutting off. Mkoll dismounted as
the Tanith troop trucks thundered into the yard after him.
Mkoll looked at the manufactory sheds around them. This was a dismal place, but the Tanith had billeted in worse.
Despite the thunder of engines and shouts, he sensed a presence behind him and spun before the other could utter a
word.
“Steady!” said the figure approaching behind him. He was a tall, well-made man in his twenties, dressed in the
local uniform. A captain, his collar pins said. His right arm was bound up tight to his chest in a padded sling, so he
wore his greatcoat on one side only, draping it like a cape over the other. Mkoll thought he was lucky that empty
sleeve was not a permanent feature.
Mkoll made a brief salute. “Sorry, you caught me by surprise. Sergeant Mkoll, 5th Platoon, Tanith First-and-Only.”
The captain saluted back stiffly with his left hand. Mkoll noticed he was also limping and there were sallow
bruises along his forehead, cheek and around his eyes. “Captain Ban Daur, Vervun Primary. Welcome to Vervunhive.”
Mkoll grunted a curt laugh. He’d never been personally welcomed to a warzone before.
“Can you introduce me to your commanding officer?” Daur asked. “I’ve been given the job of supervising your
billet. Not much good for anything else.” He said this with a rueful chuckle and a glance down at his slinged arm.
Mkoll fell in step beside him and they moved through a commotion of men, trucks, diesel fumes and unloading
work. They made small, intense, flickering shadows under the harsh lighting gantries overhead.
“You’ve seen action already?” asked Mkoll.
“Nothing to get me a medal,” Daur said. “I was on the ramparts on the first day when the shelling began. Didn’t so
much as even see what to shoot at before they took my position down and buried me in rubble. Be a few weeks yet
till I’m fit, but I wanted to be useful, so I volunteered for liaison work.”
“So you’ve not even seen the enemy yet?”
Daur shook his head. “Except for People’s Hero Kowle and a few others who made it back from the grasslands,
no one has.”
Corbec was standing by his truck, smoking a cigar, gazing placidly around the place, oblivious to the frenzy of
activity all about him. He turned slowly, taking in the sheer scale of the hive around him, beyond the glare of the
sodium lamp rigs: the towering manufactories and smelteries, the steeples of the work habs beyond them, then the
great crest of some Ecclesiarch basilica, and behind it all, the vast structure of the Main Spine, a mind-numbingly
huge bulk illuminated by a million or more windows. Big as a fething mountain peak back home on…
On nowhere. He still forgot, sometimes.
His eyes were drawn to a vast pylon near the Main Spine which rose just as high as the hive-mountain. It seemed
to mark the heart of the whole city-hub. Storms of crackling energy flared from its apex, spreading out to feed the
flickering green shield that over-arched it all. Corbec had never seen a shield effect this big before. It was quite
something. He gazed south and saw the rippling light flashes of shells falling across the Shield, deflecting and
exploding harmlessly. Quite something indeed and it looked like it worked.
He took another drag on his cigar and the coal glowed red. The sheer size of this place was going to take a lot of
getting used to. He had seen how most of his boys had been struck dumb as they entered the hive, gaping up at the
monumental architecture. He knew he had to beat that awe out of them as quickly as possible, or they’d be too busy
gazing dumbly to fight.
“Put that out!” a voice ordered crisply behind him.
Corbec turned and for a moment he thought it was Gaunt. But only for a moment. The commissar stalking towards
him had nothing of Gaunt’s presence. He had local insignia and his puffy face was pale and unhealthy. Corbec said
nothing but simply took the cigar from his mouth and raised one eyebrow. He was a good twenty-five centimetres
taller than the black-coated officer.
The man halted a few paces short, taking in the sheer size of Colm Corbec. “Commissar Langana, VPHC. This is a
secure area. Put that gakking light out!”
Corbec put the cigar back between his lips and, still silent, tapped the colonel’s rank pins on his shoulder braid.
“I…” the man began. Then, thinking better of everything, turned and stalked away.
“Colonel?”
Mkoll was approaching with another local, thankfully regular army-issue rather than one of the tight-arsed
political cadre.
“This is Captain Daur, our liaison officer.” Daur snapped his heels together as well as any man with a leg-wound
could, and saluted with his left hand. He blinked in surprise when Corbec held out his own left hand without
hesitation. Then he shook it. The grip was tight. Daur immediately warmed to this bearded, tattooed brute. He’d
taken Daur’s injury in at a glance and compensated without any comment.
“Welcome to Vervunhive, colonel,” Daur said.
“Can’t say I’m glad to be here, captain, but a war’s a war, and we go where the Emperor wills us. Did you
arrange these billets?”
Daur glanced around at the mouldering sheds where the Tanith First were breaking out their kits and lighting lamps
in neat platoon order.
“No, sir,” he replied sheepishly. “I wanted better. But space is at a premium in the hive just now.”
Corbec chuckled. “In a place this big?”
“We have been overrun with refugees and wounded from the south. All free areas such as the Commercia, the
Landing Field and the manufactories have been opened to house them. I actually requested some superior space for
your men in the lower Main Spine, but Vice Marshal Anko instructed that you should be barracked closer to the
Curtain Wall. So this is it. Gavunda Chem Plant Storebarns/Southwest. For what it’s worth.”
Corbec nodded. Lousy chem plant barns for the Tanith Ghosts. He was prepared to bet a month’s pay the Volpone
Bluebloods weren’t bedding down in some sooty hangar this night.
“We’ve cleared seven thousand square metres in these sheds for you and I can annex more if you need room to
stack supplies.”
“No need,” Corbec said. “We’re only one regiment. We won’t take much space.”
Daur led them both into the main hangar space where most of the Ghosts were preparing their billets. Through an
open shutter, Corbec could see into another wide shed where the rest were making camp.
“My men have dug latrines over there and there are a number of worker washrooms and facilities still operational
in the sheds to the left.” Daur pointed these features out in turn. “So far, the main water supplies are still on, so the
showers work. But I took the liberty of setting up water and fuel bowsers in case the supplies go down.”
Corbec looked where Daur indicated and saw a row of tanker trucks with fuel clamps and standpipes grouped by
the western fence.
“Sheds three, four and five are loaded with food and perishable supplies, and munitions orders will arrive by
daybreak. House Command has requisitioned another barn over there from House Anko for use as your medical
centre.”
Corbec gazed across at the rickety long-shed Daur pointed to. “Get Dorden to check it out, Mkoll,” he said. Mkoll
flagged down a passing trooper and sent him off to find the chief medic.
“I’ve also set up primary and secondary vox-links in the side offices here,” said Daur as he led them through a
low door into what had once been the factory supervisor’s suite. The rooms were thick with dust and cobwebs, but
two deep-gain vox units were mounted on scrubbed benches along one wall, flickering and active, chattering with
staccato dribbles of link-talk. There were even fresh paper rolls and lead-sticks laid out near the sets. The
thoroughness made Corbec smile. Maybe it was the worker-mentality of the hive.
“I assumed you’d use this as your quarters,” Daur said. He showed Corbec a side office with a cot and a folding
desk. Corbec glanced in, nodded and turned back to face the captain.
“I’d say you had made us welcome indeed, Daur, despite the facilities granted us by your hive-masters. Looks like
you’ve thought of everything. I won’t forget your trouble in a hurry.”
Daur nodded, pleased.
Corbec stepped out of the offices and raised his voice. “Sergeant Varl!”
Varl stopped what he was doing and came across the hangar space double-time, threading between billeting
Tanith. “Colonel?”
“Rejoice. You’ve won the supplies duty. Those sheds there,” Corbec glanced at Daur for confirmation, “are for
storage. Raise a detail and get our stuff housed from the trucks.”
Varl nodded and strode off, calling up volunteers.
With Daur and Mkoll beside him, Corbec surveyed the activity in the billet. “Looks like the Ghosts are making
themselves at home,” he murmured to no one in particular.
“Ghosts? Why do you call them that? Where are you from?” Daur asked.
“Tanith,” Mkoll said.
Corbec smiled sadly and contradicted the sergeant. “Nowhere, Captain Daur. We’re from nowhere and that’s why
we’re ghosts.”
“This is the only space available,” Commissar Langana said flatly.
“Not good enough,” Dorden said, looking around the dimly-lit hangar, taking in the shattered windows, the piles of
refuse and the layers of dust. “I can’t make a field hospital in here. The filth will kill more of my regiment than the
enemy.”
The VPHC officer looked round sourly at the doctor. “The vice marshal’s orders were quite specific. This area is
designated for medical needs.”
“We could clean up,” Trooper Lesp suggested. A thin, hangdog man, Lesp was skulking to one side in the doorway
with Chayker and Foskin. The three of them represented Dorden’s medical orderlies, troopers who had been trained
for field hospital work by the chief medic himself. Gherran and Mtane, the only other fully qualified medics in the
unit, were looking around behind them.
“With what?” Dorden asked. “By the time we’ve scoured this place clean, the war will be over.”
Lesp shrugged.
“You must make do. This is war,” Langana announced. “War levels all stations and makes us work with the
bravery in our limbs and the ingenuity in our minds.”
Dorden turned his grizzled face to look directly into the puffy visage of the political officer. “Do you make that
crap up yourself, or does someone write it down for you?”
The orderlies behind him tried to cover their sniggers. Gherran and Mtane laughed out loud.
“I could break you for such insolence!” Langana spat. Anger made his cheeks florid.
“Hmm?” Dorden replied, not seeming to hear. “And deprive an Imperial Guard regiment of their chief medic?
Your vice marshal wouldn’t be too happy to hear about that, would he?”
Langana was about to retort when a strong, female voice echoed through the dirty space.
“I’m looking for the doctor! Hello?”
Dorden pushed past the seething commissar and went to the door. He was met by a short, slim, young woman in a
form-fitting red uniform with embroidered cuffs. She carried a medical pack over one shoulder and was escorted by
five more dressed like her: three men and two women.
“Dorden, chief medical officer, Tanith First.”
“Surgeon Ana Curth, Inner Hab Collective Medical Hall 67/mv,” she replied, nodding to him and glancing around
the dingy hall. “Captain Daur, your liaison officer, was troubled by the state of the facilities and called my hall for
support.”
“As you can see, Ana, it is a long way short of adequate,” said Dorden with a gentle gesture that took in the decay.
She frowned at him briefly. His use of her forename surprised her. Such informalities were rare in the hive. It was
discourteous, almost condescending. She’d worked for her status and position as hard as any other hiver.
“That’s Surgeon Curth, medic.”
Dorden looked round at the woman, surprised, clearly hurt that he had offended her in any way. Behind Dorden,
Langana smiled.
“My mistake. Surgeon Curth, indeed,” Dorden looked away. “Well, as you can see, this is no place for wounded.
Can you possibly… assist us?”
She looked him up and down, still bristling but calming a little. There was something in his tired, avuncular
manner that made her almost regret her tone. This was not some bravo trooper trying to hit on her. This was an old
man with slumping shoulders. There was a weariness in his manner that no amount of sleep could ease. His lined
eyes had seen too much, she realised.
Ana Curth turned to Langana. “I wouldn’t treat cattle in a place like this. I’m issuing an M-notice on it at once.”
“You can’t—” Langana began.
“Oh, yes I can, commissar! Fifth Bill of Rights, Amendment 457/hj: ‘In event of conflict, surgeon staff may
commandeer all available resources for the furtherance of competent medical work.’ I want scrub teams from the
hive sanitation department here by morning, with pressure hoses and steam scourers. I want disinfectant sluices. I
want sixty cots, bedding, four theatre tables with lights, screens and instruments, flak-board lagging for the walls and
windows, proper light-power, water and heat-links recoupled, and patches made to the gakking roof! Got it?”
“I—”
“Do you understand me, Political Officer Langana?”
Langana hesitated. “I will have to call House Command for these requirements.”
“Do so!” barked Curth. Dorden looked on. He liked her already.
“Use my hive caste-code: 678/cu. Got it? That will give you the authority to process my request. And do it now,
Langana!”
The commissar saluted briefly and then marched away out of the chamber. He had to push through the smirking
Tanith orderlies to exit.
Dorden turned to the woman. “My thanks, Surgeon Curth. The Tanith are in your debt.”
“Just do your job and we’ll get on fine,” she replied bluntly. “I have more wounded refugees in my hall now than I
can deal with. I don’t want your overspill submerging me when the fighting starts.”
“Of course you don’t. I am grateful, surgeon.”
Dorden fixed her with an honest smile. She seemed about to soften and smile back, but she turned and led her team
away out of the door. “We’ll return in two days to help you set up.”
“Surgeon?”
She stopped, turning back.
“How overrun are you? With the wounded, I mean?”
She sighed. “To breaking point.”
“Could you use six more trained staff?” Dorden asked. He waved casually at his fellow medics and waiting
orderlies. “We have no wounded yet to treat, Emperor watch us. Until we have, we would be happy to assist.”
Curth glanced at her chief orderly. “Thank you. Your offer is appreciated. Follow us, please.”
Varl supervised the store detail, carrying more than his share thanks to the power of his artificial arm. With a team of
thirty, he ordered the stacking and layout of the Tanith supplies. There was plenty of stuff in the barn already, well
marked and identified by the triplicate manifest data-slates, but there was still more than enough room for the
supplies and munitions they had brought with them.
Another truck backed up to the doorway, lights winking, and Domor, Cocoer and Brostin helped to shift the crates
of perishables to their appointed stacks. Varl allocated another area for the munitions he had been told would arrive
later.
Caffran looked up as the sergeant called to him. “Sweep the back,” Varl ordered. “Make sure the rear of the barn
is secure.”
Caffran nodded, pulling his jacket and camo-cape from a nearby crate-pile and putting them back on. He was still
sweat-hot from the work.
Lifting his lasgun, he paced round the rear of the supply stacks, moving through the darkness and shadows,
checking the rotting rear wall of the hangar for holes.
Something scurried in the dark.
He swung his gun round. Rodents?
There was no further movement. Caffran edged forward and noticed the edge of a crate that had been chewed
away. The plastic-wrapped packets of dried biscuit inside had been invaded. Definitely rodents. There was a trail of
crumbs and shreds of plastic seal. They’d have to set traps — and poison too probably.
He paused. The hole in the crate’s side was far too high to be the work of rodents. Unless they bred something the
size of a hound in the sewers of this place. That wouldn’t surprise him, given the giant scale of everything else here
in Vervunhive.
He armed his lasgun and slid around the edge of the next stack.
Something scurried again.
He hastened forward, gun raised, looking for a target. Feth, maybe the local vermin would be good eating. They’d
had precious little fresh meat in the last forty days.
There was a movement to his left and he dropped to one knee, taking aim. Beyond the supply stacks, there was a
pale, green slice of light, a jagged hole in the back of the barn through which the glow of the Shield high above
leaked in.
Caffran shuffled forward.
A noise to the right.
He spun around. Nothing. He saw how several more crates had been clawed into.
Something flickered past the slice of light, something moving through it quickly, blocking out the glow.
Caffran ran forward, pulling himself sideways through the gap in the rotten fibre-planks of the hangar’s rear wall
and out into the tangled waste of debris and rubble behind the storage barn.
He crawled out, got down, raised his gun…
And saw the boy. A small boy, eight or nine years old it seemed to Caffran, scampering up a mound of nibble with
a wrap of biscuits in his hand.
The boy reached the summit and another figure loomed out of the dark. A girl, older, in her late teens, clad in
vulgar rags and decorated with piercings. She took the wrap from the boy and hugged him tightly.
Caffran got up, lowering his gun. “Hey!” he called.
The child and the girl looked round at him sharply, like animals caught in a huntsman’s light.
Caffran saw for just a moment the strong, fierce, beautiful face of the girl before the children ducked out of sight
and vanished into the wasteland.
He ran up the slope after them, but they were gone.
In a foxhole a hundred metres away from the back of the storage barns, Tona Criid hugged Dalin to her and willed
him to be quiet.
“Good boy, good boy,” she murmured. She took out the biscuits and tore the wrap open so he could have one.
Dalin wolfed it down. He was hungry. They were all hungry out here.
Nutrient clouds pumped into the Iron Tank fed the dreaming High Master of Vervunhive. He rolled in his oily fluid
womb, pulling at his link feeds, feet and hands twitching like a dreaming dog. He dreamed of the Trade War, before
his birth. The images of his dream were informed by the pict-library he had studied in his youth. He dreamed of his
illustrious predecessor, the great Heironymo, haughtily spurning the rivalry with Ferrozoica, arming for war. How
wrong, how very foolish! Such a grossly physical stubbornness! And the hive held him in such esteem for his heroic
leadership! Fools! Cattle! Unthinking chaff!
Commerce is always war. But the war of commerce may be fought in such subtle, exquisite ways. To raise arms,
to mobilise bodies, to turn beautiful hive profits into war machines and guns, rations and ammunition…
What a pathetic mind, Heironymo! How blind of you to miss the real avenues of victory! House Clatch would
have bowed to mercantile embargoes long before the brave boys of Vervun Primary had overturned the walls of
Zoica! A concession here, a bargain there, a stifling of funds or supplies, a blockade…
Salvador Sondar floated upwards, his dreams now machine-language landscapes of autoledgers, contoured
ziggurats of mounted interest values, rivers of exchange rates, terraces of production value outputs.
The mathematical vistas of mercantile triumph he adored more than any other place in the universe.
He twitched again in the warm soup, iridescent bubbles coating his shrunken limbs and fluttering to the roof of the
Iron Tank. He was pleased now that he had killed the old man.
Heironymo had ruled too long! A hundred and twenty years old, beloved by the stupid, vapid public, still
unwilling to make way for his twenty year-old nephew and obvious successor! It had been a merciful act, Salvador
dreamed to himself, though the guilt of it had plagued him for the last fifty years. His sleeping features winced.
Yes, it had been merciful… for the good of the hive and for the further prosperity of House Sondar, noble line!
Had output not tripled during his reign? And now Gnide and Croe and Chass and the other weaklings told him that
mercantile war was no longer an option! Fools!
Gnide…
Now… he was dead, wasn’t he?
And Slaydo too? The great warmaster, dead of poison. No, that wasn’t right. Stabbed on the carpet of the audience
hall… no… no…
Why were his dreams so confused? It was the chatter. That was it. The chatter. He wished it would cease. It was a
hindrance to reason. He was High Master of Vervunhive and he wanted his dream-mind dean and unpolluted so he
could command his vast community to victory once more.
The Shield? What? What about the Shield?
The chatter was lisping something.
No! N-n—
Salvador Sondar’s dreams were suddenly as suspended as the dreamer for a moment. Fugue state snarled his
dream-mind. He floated in the tank as if dead.
Then the dreams resumed in a rush. To poison the servitor taster, that had been a stroke of genius! No one had ever
suspected! And to use a neural toxin that left no trace. A stroke, they had said! A stroke had finally levelled old
Heironymo! Salvador had been forced to inject his own tear glands with saline to make himself cry at the state
funeral.
The weeping! The mass mourning! Fifty years ago, but still it gnawed at him! Why had the hivers loved the old
bastard so dearly?
The chatter was there again, at the very boundary of his mind-impulse limit, like crows in a distant treeline at
dawn, like insects in the grasslands at dusk.
Chattering…
The Shield? What are you saying about the Shield?
I am Salvador Sondar. Get out of my mind and—
The wasted body twitched and spasmed in the Iron Tank.
Outside, the servitors jiggled and jerked in sympathy.
The vast railhead terminal at Veyveyr Gate was a dank, blackened mess. Clouds of steam rolled like fog off the
cooling rubble and tangled metal where millions of litres of fluid retardant had been sprayed on the incendiary fires
to get them under control.
Major Jun Racine of the Vervun Primary moved between the struggling work teams and tried to supervise the
clearance work. Tried… it was a joke. He had two hundred bodies, mostly enlisted men, but some Administratum
labourers, as well as trackwrights and rolling-stock stewards from the Rail Guild. It was barely enough even to
make a dent in destruction of this scale.
Racine was no structural engineer. Even with fourteen heavy tractors fitted with dozer blades at his disposal, there
was no way he was going to meet House Command’s orders and get the railhead secure in three days. Great roof
sections had slumped like collapsed egg-shell, and rockcrete pillars had crumpled and folded like soft candy-sticks.
He was reluctant to instruct his men to dig out anything for fear of bringing more down. Already he had sent five men
to the medical halls after a section of wall had toppled on them.
The air was wet and acrid, and water dripped down from every surface, pooling five centimetres deep on any
open flooring.
Racine checked his data-slate again. The cold, basic schematics on its screen simply didn’t match anything here in
real life. He couldn’t even locate the positions of the main power and gas-feed mains. Nearby, a rail tractor unit sat
up-ended in a vast crater, its piston wheels dangling off its great black iron shape. What if fuel had leaked from it?
Racine thought about leaked fuel, shorting electrics, spilling gas — even unexploded bombs — an awful lot. He did
the maths and hated the answer he kept getting.
“Tough job, major,” said a voice from behind him.
Racine turned. The speaker was a short, bulky man in his fifties, black with grime and leaning on an axe-rack as a
crutch. He had a serious eye-wound bandaged with a filthy strip of linen. But his clothes, as far as Racine could
make out under the char and the dirt, were those of a smeltery gang boss.
“You shouldn’t be here, friend,” Racine said with a patient smile.
“None of us should,” Agun Soric replied, stomping forward. He stood beside Racine and they both gazed dismally
out over the tangled ruins of the railhead towards the vast, looming shape of the gate and the Curtain Wall. It was a
sea of rubble and debris, and Racine’s workforce moved like ants around the merest breakwaters of it.
“I didn’t ask for this. I’m sure you didn’t either,” Soric said.
“Gak, but that’s right! You from the refuges?”
“Name’s Soric, plant supervisor, Vervun Smeltery One.” Soric made a brief gesture over at the vast, ruined shell
of the once-proud ore plant adjacent to the railhead. “I was in there when the shells took it. Quite a show.”
“I’ll bet. Get many out?”
Soric sucked air through his teeth and looked down, shaking his bullet-head. “Not nearly enough. Three hundred,
maybe. Got ourselves places in a refuge — eventually. It was all a bit confused.”
Racine looked round at him, taking in the set power and simmering anger inside the hive worker. “What’s it like? I
hear the refuges are choked to capacity.”
“It’s bad. Imagine this,” Soric pointed to the railhead destruction, “but the ruins are human, not rockcrete and
ceramite. Supplies are short: food, clean water, medical aid. They’re doing their best, but you know — millions of
homeless, most of them hurt, all of them scared.”
Racine shivered.
“I tried to get some aid for my workers, but they told me that all refugees were set on fourth-scale rations unless
they were employed in the hive war effort. That might get them bumped up to third-scale, maybe even second.”
“Tough times…” Racine said and they fell silent.
“What if I could bring you close on three hundred eager workers? Willing types, I mean, workers who can haul
and labour and who know a bit about shifting and managing loose debris?”
“To help out?”
“Gak, yes! My mob are sick of sitting on their arses in the refuge, doing nothing. We could help you make a job of
this.”
Racine looked at him cautiously, trying to see if there was a trick. “For the good of the hive?” he smiled,
questioningly.
“Yeah, for the good of the hive. And for the good of my workers, before they go crazy and lose morale. And I
figure if we help you, you could put in a word. Maybe get us a better ration scale.”
Racine hesitated. His vox link was beeping. It would be a call from House Command, he was sure, asking for a
progress report.
“I need to get this cleared, or at least a path cleared through it. My regiment have the gate blocked temporarily, but
if the enemy hits us there, we need to have a secure wall of defence dug in, with supply lines and troop access. You
and your mob help me do that, I’ll get your bloody ration scale for you.”
Soric smiled. He tucked the axe-rack crutch under his armpit so he could extend a dirty hand. Racine shook it.
“Vervun Smeltery One won’t let you down, major.”
The chronometer’s chime told him it was dawn, but even up here in the Mid Spine, there was little change in the light
outside. The glow of the Shield and the smoke haze saw to that.
Amchanduste Worlin took breakfast in the observation bubble of his clan’s palace. He had risen earlier than any of
his kin, though junior Guild Worlin clerics and servitors were already about, preparing the day’s work protocols.
In orange-silk night robes, he sat in a suspensor chair at the round mahogany table and consumed the breakfast his
servants had brought him on a lacquered tray. The taster servitor had pronounced it safe and been dismissed.
Worlin’s attention oscillated between the panoramic view of the city outside and the data-plate built into the table
top where the morning news and situation bulletins threaded and interwove in clusters of glowing runes.
An egg soufflé, smoked fish, fresh fruit, toasted wheatcakes and a jug of caffeine. Not recommended emergency
rations, Worlin knew, but what was the point of being a member of the privileged merchant elite if you couldn’t draw
on the stockpiles of your clan’s resources once in a while?
He improved the caffeine with a shot of joiliq. Worlin felt a measure of contentment for the first time in days and it
wasn’t just the alcohol. There was one holding owned by House Worlin, one under his direct control, that gave them
commercial leverage in this war: liquid fuel. He had quite forgotten it in his initial dismay and panic.
Last season, he had won the fuel concession from Guild Farnora, much to his clan’s delight.
Thirty percent of the fuel imports from Vannick Hive, three whole pipelines, were under the direct control of
Guild Worlin. He looked at the megalitre input figures on his data-slate, then made a few calculations as to how the
market price per barrel would soar exponentially with each day of conflict. He’d done the sums several times
already, but they pleased him.
“Guild sire?” His private clerk, Magnal, entered the bubble.
“What is it?”
“I was just preparing your itinerary for the day. You have a bond-meeting with the Guild Council at eleven.”
“I know.”
Magnal paused.
“Something else?”
“I… I brought you the directive from the Legislature last night. The one that ordered all fuel pipelines from
Vannick closed off now our kin-hive has fallen. You… you do not seem to have authorised the closure, guild sire.”
“The closure…”
“All guilds controlling fuel are ordered to blow the pipes on the north shore and block any remaining stretches
with rockcrete.” Magnal tried to show a data slate to Worlin, but the guilder shrugged it away diffidently. “Our work
crews are standing by…”
“How much fuel have we stockpiled in our East Hass Storage facility?” Worlin asked.
Magnal muttered a considerable figure.
“And how much more is still coming through the pipe?”
Another murmur, a figure of magnitude.
Worlin nodded. “I deplore the loss of our Vannick cousins. But the fuel still comes through. It is the duty Guild
Worlin owes to Vervunhive that we keep the pipes open for as long as there is a resource to be collected. I’ll shut the
pipes the moment they run dry.”
“But the directive, guild sire…”
“Let me worry about that, Magnal. The flow may only last another day, another few hours. But if I close now, can
you imagine the lost profits? Not good business, my friend. Not good at all.”
Magnal looked uncomfortable.
“They say there is a security issue here, guild sire…”
Worlin put down his caffeine cup. It hit the saucer a little too hard, making Magnal jump, though the kindly smile
never left Worlin’s face. “I am not a stupid man, clerk. I take my responsibilities seriously, to the hive, to my clan. If
I close the lines now, I would be derelict in my duties to both. Let the soldiery gain glory with their bravado at the
war front. History will relate my bravery here, fighting for Vervunhive as only a merchant can.”
“Your name will be remembered, guild sire,” Magnal said and left the room.
Worlin sat for a while, tapping his silver sugar tongs on the edge of his saucer. There was no doubt about it.
He would have to kill Magnal too.
At the very southernmost edge of the outer habs and industry sectors, the great hive was a sky-filling dome of green
light, pale in the morning sun, hazed by shell smoke.
Captain Olin Fencer of Vervun Primary crawled from his dug-out and blinked into the cold morning air. That air
was still thick with the mingled reeks of thermite and fycelene, burning fuel and burned flesh. But there was
something different about this morning. He couldn’t quite work out what it was.
Fencer’s squad of fifty troopers had been stationed at Outhab Southwest when the whole thing began. Vox links
had been lost in the first wave of shelling and they had been able to do nothing but dig in and ride it out, as day after
day of systematic bombardment flattened and ruptured the industrial outer city behind them.
There was no chance to retreat back into the hive, though Fencer knew millions of habbers in the district had fled
that way. He had a post to hold. He was stationed at it with the thirty-three men remaining to him when Vegolain’s
armoured column had rolled past down the Southern Highway, out into the grasslands. His squad had cheered them.
They’d been hiding in their bunkers, some weeping in rage or pain or dismay, that night when the broken remnants
of the column had limped back in, heading for the city.
By then, he had twenty men left.
In the days that followed, Fencer had issued his own orders by necessity, as all links to House Command were
broken. Indeed, he was sure no one in the hive believed there was anyone still alive out here. He had followed the
edicts of the Vervun Primary emergency combat protocols to the letter, organising the digging of a series of trenches,
supply lines and fortifications through the ruins of the outhabs, though the shelling still fell on them.
His first sergeant, Grosslyn, had mined the roadways and other teams had dug tank-traps and dead-snares. Despite
the shelling, they had also raised a three hundred-metre bulwark of earth, filled an advance ditch with iron stakes and
railing sections, and sandbagged three stubbers and two flamers into positions along the Highway.
All by the tenth day. By then, he had eighteen soldiers left.
Three more had died of wounds or disease by the fourteenth day, when the high-orbit flares of troopships told
them Guard reinforcements were on their way planetside.
Now it was sunrise on the nineteenth day. Plastered in dust and blood, Fencer moved down the main trench
position as his soldiers woke or took over guard duty from the weary night sentries.
But now he had sixty troops. Main Spine thought everything was levelled out here, everything dead, but they were
wrong. Not everyone on the blasted outer habs had fled to the hive, though it must have seemed that way. Many
stayed, too unwilling, too stubborn, or simply too frightened to move. As the days of bombardment continued, Fencer
found men and women — and some children too — flocking to him from the ruins. He got the non-coms into any
bunkers he had available and he set careful rationing. All able-bodied workers, of either sex, he recruited into his
vanguard battalion.
They’d raised precious medical supplies from the infirmary unit of a bombed-out mine and they’d set up a field
hospital in the ruins of a bakery, under the supervision of a teenage girl called Nessa who was a trainee nurse.
They’d pilfered food supplies in the canteens of three ruined manufactories in the region. A VPHC Guard House on
West Transit 567/kl had provided them with a stock of lasguns and small arms for the new recruits, as well as
explosives and one of the flamers.
Fencer’s recruits had come from everywhere. He had under his command clerks who’d never held a weapon,
loom workers with poor eyesight and shell-shocked habbers who were deaf and could only take orders visually.
The core of his recruits, the best of them, were twenty-one miners from Number Seventeen Deep Working, who
had literally dug their way out of the ground after the main lift shaft of their facility had fallen.
Fencer bent low and hurried down the trench line, passing through blown-out house structures, under fallen
derricks, along short communication tunnels the miners had dug to link his defences. Their expertise had been a
godsend.
He reached the second stub emplacement at 567/kk and nodded to the crew. Corporal Gannen was making soup in
his mess tin over a burner stove, while his crewmate, a loom-girl called Calie, scanned the horizon. They were a
perfect example of the way necessity had made heroes of them all. Gannen was a trained stub-gunner, but better at
ammo feeding than firing. The girl had proven to be a natural at handling the gun itself. So they swapped, the
corporal conceding no pride that he now fed ammo to a loom-girl half his age.
Fencer moved on, passing two more guard points and found Gol Kolea in the corner nest, overlooking the
highway. Kolea, the natural leader of the miners, was a big man, with great power in his upper body. He was sipping
hot water from a battered tin cup, his lasgun at his side. Fencer intended to give him a brevet rank soon. The man had
earned it. He had led his miners out of the dark, formed them into a cohesive work duty and done everything Fencer
could have asked of them. And more besides. Kolea was driven by grim, intense fury against the Zoican foe. He had
family in the hive, though he didn’t speak of them. Fencer was sure it was the thought of them that had galvanised
Kolea to such efforts.
“Captain,” Kolea nodded as Fencer ducked in.
“Something’s wrong, Gol,” Fencer said. “Something’s different.”
The powerfully built miner grinned at him. “You haven’t noticed?” he asked.
“Noticed?”
“The shelling has stopped.”
Fencer was stunned. It had been so much a part of their daily life for the last fortnight or more, he hadn’t realised
it had gone. Indeed, his ears were still ringing with remembered Shockwaves.
“Emperor save us!” he gasped. “I’m so stupid.”
He’d been awake for upwards of twenty minutes and it took a miner to tell him that they were no longer under fire.
“See anything?” Fencer asked, crawling up to the vigil slot in the sandbags next to Kolea for a look.
“No. Dust, smoke, haze… nothing much.”
Fencer was about to reach for his scope when Zoica began its land offensive.
A wave of las-fire peppered the entire defence line of the outhabs, like the flashes of a billion firecrackers. The
sheer scale of the salvos was bewildering. Nine of Fencer’s troops died instantly. Three more, all workers, fled,
utterly unprepared for the fury of a land assault.
Grenades and rockets dropped in around them, blowing out two communication dug-outs. Another hit the mess hall
and torched their precious food supplies.
Fencer’s people began their resistance.
He’d ordered them all to set weapons for single fire to preserve ammunition and power cells. Even the stubbers
had been ordered only to fire if they had a target. In response to the Zoican assault, their return seemed meagre and
frail.
Fencer got up to the nest top and raised his lasgun. Five hundred metres ahead, through the smoke and the rubble,
he saw the first shapes of the enemy, troopers in heavy, ochre-coloured battledress, advancing in steady ranks.
Fencer began firing. Below, Kolea opened up too.
They took thirteen down between them in the first five minutes.
Zoican tanks, mottled ochre and growling like beasts, bellied up the road and fanned out into the ruins, using the
available open roadways and other aisles in the rubble sea. Mines took two of them out in huge vomits of flame and
armour pieces, and the burning hulks blocked the advance of six more.
Rockets flailed into the bulwark and blew a fifteen-metre section out. Corporal Tanik and three other troops were
disintegrated.
Another Zoican tank, covered with mesh netting, rumbled through the ruins and diverted down a dead-snare.
Blocked in by rockcrete walls to either side and ahead, it tried to reverse and swing its turret as one of the Vervun
flamer positions washed it with incandescent gusts of blowtorch fire and cooked it apart.
Sergeant Grosslyn, with two Vervun Primary regulars and six enlisted habbers, cut a crossfire down at Zoican
troops trying to scramble a staked ditch on the eastern end of the file. Between them, they killed fifty or more, many
impaled on the railings and wire. When Jada, the female worker next to him, was hit in the chest and dropped,
screaming, Grosslyn turned to try and help her. A las-round from one of the dying Zoican assault troops impaled on
the stakes took the back of his head off.
Gannen and Calie held the west transit for two hours, taking out dozens of the enemy and at least one armoured
vehicle which ruptured and blew out as the loom-girl raked it with armour-piercing stub rounds.
Gannen was torn apart by shrapnel from a rocket when the enemy pushed around to the left.
Calie kept firing, feeding her own gun until a tank round blew her, her stub gun and twenty metres of the defence
bulwark into the sky.
Overwhelmed, Fencer’s force fell back into the ruins of the outhab. Some were crushed by the advancing armour.
One enlisted clerk, dying of blood-loss from a boltwound, made a suicide run with a belt of grenades and took out a
stationary tank. The explosion lit up the low clouds and scraps of tank metal rained down over the surrounding
streets.
Others fought a last-ditch attempt as the sheer numbers of the advancing infantry overran them. There were insane
pockets of close fighting, bayonet to bayonet, hand to hand. Not a metre of Vervunhive’s outhab territory was given
up without the most horrific effort.
Gol Kolea, his las weapon exhausted, met the enemy at the barricade and killed them one by one, to left and right,
with savage swings of his axe-rake. He screamed his wife’s name with every blow.
A las-round punctured Captain Olin Fencer’s body at the hip and exited through his opposite shoulder. As he fell,
weeping, he clicked his lasgun to autofire and sprayed his massing killers with laser rounds.
His hand was still squeezing the trigger when the pack ran out.
By then, he was already dead.
SIX
CHAINS OF COMMAND
“A war waged by committee is a war already lost.”
—Sebastian Thor, Sermons, vol. XV, ch. DIV
Gaunt felt the monumental bulk of the Curtain Wall around him actually vibrate. The shellfire falling against its outer
skin was a dull roar.
Captain Daur and three other officers of the liaison staff led the oversight party up the stair-drum of a secondary
tower in the wall just west of the massive Heironymo Sondar Gate. Gaunt had brought Rawne and Mkoll, with
Trooper Milo as his adjutant. General Grizmund — with three of his senior Narmenians — and General Nash —
with two of his regimental aides — made up the rest of the party, along with Tarrian of the VPHC. They had a
bodyguard detail of thirty Vervun Primary troopers in full battledress.
The oversight party emerged onto the tower-top, where hot breezes, stifling with fycelene fumes, billowed over
them. Three missile launchers were raised and ready here, their crews standing by, but additional awnings of flakboard
had been erected in preparation for the visit of the dignitaries, and the launchers, with no safe room for their
exhaust wash under this extra shelter, had fallen silent. The crews saluted the visitors smartly.
“These are for our benefit?” Gaunt asked Tarrian, indicating the freshly raised awnings.
“Of course.”
“You muzzle an entire defence tower so we can get a safe peek over the Wall?”
Tarrian frowned. “General Sturm has made it a standing requirement every time he visits the Wall. I presumed you
and the other eminent generals here would expect the same.”
“We’ve come to fight, not hide. Take them down and get these crews operational.”
Tarrian looked round at Nash and Grizmund. The Narmenian nodded briefly. “Gaunt speaks for us all,” said Nash
dryly. “We don’t need any soft-soap.”
Tarrian turned from the group and began issuing orders to the launcher crews.
The rest of the oversight party approached the rampart and took up magnoculars or used the available viewscopes
on their tripod stands. Milo handed Gaunt his own scope from its pouch and the commissar dialled the magnification
as he raised it and gazed out.
Below them, the miserable wasteland of the southern outer habs lay exposed and broken. There was no
discernible sign of life, but a hateful storm of enemy shelling and missiles pounded in across it at the hive. A fair
amount fell short into the habs, but a good percentage struck the Curtain Wall itself. Gaunt craned over for a moment,
training his scope down the gentle slope of the Wall. Its adamantine surface was peppered and scarred like the face
of a moon, as far as he could see. Every few seconds, batteries to either side of them on the Wall fired out, or the
great siege guns in the emplacements below in the thickness of the Wall recoiled and volleyed again.
The vibration of the Wall continued.
“No way of knowing numbers or scale—” began Nash.
Grizmund shook his head. “Not so, sir,” he replied, pointing out to the very edge of the vast, outer-hab waste. “As
we have been told, this is no longer the work of their long-range artillery out in the grasslands. This is ground assault
from closer range — armour moving in through the outer habitations and factories.”
“Are you certain?” asked Gaunt.
“You can see the flashes of tank cannons as they fire. Four, five kilometres out, in the very skirts of the outer habs.
Their weapons are on full elevation for maximum range, so the muzzle-flashes are high and exposed. It is a simple
matter of observing, counting, estimating.”
Gaunt watched for flashes through his scope. Like Nash, he was an infantry commander, and he always
appreciated technical insight from experienced officers with expertise in other schools of warfare. Grizmund had a
fine reputation as an armour commander. Gaunt fully trusted the Narmenian’s judgement in this. As he looked, he
began to discern the flickering display of brief light points out in the hinterland.
“Your estimate?” asked Nash, also studying the scene and, like Gaunt, willing to listen to an expert opinion.
Grizmund glanced to his attending officers, who all looked up from their scopes.
“Nachin?”
The brigadier answered directly, his voice rich with the taut vowel sounds of the Narmenian accent. “At a first
estimate, armour to the magnitude of twenty thousand pieces. Straight-form advance, with perhaps a forced salient to
the east, near those tall cooling towers still standing. Innumerable rockets and mortars, harder to trace, but all
mobile. Forty, maybe forty-five thousand.”
The other Narmenians concurred. Grizmund turned back to Gaunt and Nash as Tarrian rejoined the group. “Nachin
knows his stuff as well as me. You heard his numbers. A multiple regiment-strength assault. Grand-scale armour
attack. Yet — if what Commissar Kowle says is correct — not even a fraction of their numbers.”
“We can presume other army strengths are moving round through the mining district, the mud flats, perhaps the
eastern outer habs and the Hass East river junction too,” said Nash dourly.
“I can make no estimates of troop strength, however,” Grizmund added.
“With permission, sir,” Rawne said, and Gaunt nodded for him to continue.
Rawne indicated the scene below with precise gestures of his nimble hands, his killer’s hands. “If you watch the
armour flashes as General Grizmund has suggested, they form a rough line, like a contour. Compare that to the fall of
shells. The edge of the shortest falling shells — you can see that from the explosions and from the smoke fires —
approximately matches that line, with a break of perhaps a kilometre and a half between armour and line of fire. That
is the space we might expect the infantry advancing before the armour, to occupy.”
Nash nodded, impressed by the junior Tanith’s insight.
“We can’t judge their tactics by our own,” Rawne went on, “Feth, I’ve seen the forces of the Chaos-scum perform
many tactical aberrations on the fields of war, but assuming they are not intent on slaughtering their own troops, and
assuming the widest margin of error, that shows us a clear belt of infantry advance. Even single line abreast, I’d say
we were welcoming over half a million down there. Double the line, double the figure, triple it—”
“We may be senior cadre, but we follow your maths, major,” said Gaunt and the others laughed darkly. “A fine
assessment. Thank you.”
“At least a million,” said Mkoll, suddenly.
They all looked round at him.
“Scout-sergeant?”
“Listen, sir,” said Mkoll and they all did, hearing nothing more than the persistent wail and wail-echoes of the
shelling and the crumps of explosions.
“Behind the impacts, a higher note, like a creaking, like the wind.”
Gaunt fought hard to screen out the sounds of the assault bombing. He heard vague whispers of the sound Mkoll
described.
“Lasguns, sir. So many lasguns firing over each other that their individual sounds have become one shrieking note.
You’d need a… a feth of a lot of lasguns to make that sound.”
At the back of the group, Daur noticed that Gaunt’s adjutant, Milo, had crossed to the western lip of the tower and
was gazing out. The adjutant was no more than a youth, his pale skin marked by a strange blue tattoo as seemed to be
the custom with so many of the Ghosts.
Daur crossed to him, limping. “What do you see?” he asked.
“What’s that?” asked Milo, pointing down to the east. Far away, round the curve of the massive Curtain Wall, past
the Sondar and Veyveyr Gates and the ruin of the Ore Works, a great, black slope extended down out of the hive, two
kilometres wide and five deep. It looked like a tide of tar. The Curtain Wall broke in a gap fourteen hundred metres
wide to let it out.
“The Spoil,” Daur replied. “It’s a… a mountain of rock refuse and processed ore waste from the smelteries and
mine workings. One of the landmarks of Vervunhive,” he laughed.
“The Wall is broken there.”
“The Spoil’s been there longer than the Wall. The Wall was built around it.”
“But still, it’s a break in the defence.”
“Don’t worry, it’s well protected. The fifth division of my Regiment, the ‘Spoilers’, are dedicated to guarding that
area: twenty thousand men. They take their work seriously. Besides, the Spoil itself is bloody treacherous: steep,
unsafe, constantly slipping. It’s probably harder to get past than the Curtain Wall itself. An enemy would waste
thousands trying a foolish gambit like that!”
Daur smiled encouragingly at Milo and then turned away and rejoined the oversight tour.
Milo felt sorry for him. Daur had no experience of the enemy, no knowledge of the way they expended and used
their troops wholesale to gain their objectives. The soldiers of Vervunhive and the tactics they had evolved were too
deeply focused upon the experience of fighting sane enemies.
In the main group, Gaunt looked to his fellow regiment commanders. “Assessments?”
“Way too much armour for an infantry-based counterjab just now, but I’d as soon not let those bastards reach the
walls,” said Nash.
“I’d like to deploy my tank divisions to engage them out there,” Grizmund said. “Supported by whatever the
NorthCol armour units can supply. We’re not overwhelmed yet. If we can stop them in the outer habs clear of the
main hive, we can push an advance spearhead right down into the heart of them. For all their infamous numbers, they
are extended over a massive area. That’s how I’d go. Armoured counter-assault, direct and sudden, take the ground
out from under them, if only a section, then open a way to turn and flank them, cutting into their reserve lines. And dig
a path for the infantry too.”
Nash agreed vehemently. “I’ll happily support an organised push of that sort.”
“So will I,” Gaunt said. “They’ve taken more than enough ground. We should stop them dead, even if only in this
west sector.”
Grizmund nodded. “The gates this side of the hive must be opened. I’ll gladly fight these bastards, no matter how
many there are, but I need room for my machines to mobilise and manoeuvre. I’d rather do that out there in the habs
than wait until they’re at the Wall.”
“Or inside it,” Rawne added.
“Something of a first,” Gaunt smiled at his colleagues. “Three regimental officers agreed on a tactical approach.”
There was more general laughter, cut short by the first shrieks of the missile launchers on the tower reopening fire
now the awnings were down.
“That assessment does not jibe with General Sturm’s strategy,” Tarrian said from the side.
Gaunt looked round at him. “I feel uneasy whenever a political officer uses a vague word like ‘jibe’, Commissar
Tarrian. What do you mean?”
“I understand General Sturm’s tactical recommendations for the prosecution of this conflict are already drawn up
and under examination by Marshal Croe, the House Command Strategy Committee and representatives of the noble
houses. I hear they have the full support of Vice Marshal Anko and Commissar Kowle.”
“It sounds like they’re as good as decided!” Nash snarled, his heavy chin with its bristle of grey stubble set hard.
“Are we wasting our time up here? What good is this oversight tour if they’ve already set on a course?” Grizmund
asked.
“I have had past dealings with the general of the Volpone,” Gaunt remarked sourly. “I have no doubt he feels
himself to be the senior Guard officer in this theatre and the hive elders have lauded him as such. But he is not a man
for personal confrontation. Better he gives us something to occupy our attentions while he makes his own decisions.
Hence this… sight-seeing.”
Gaunt turned sharply to look at Tarrian. “And you’d know what those decisions were, wouldn’t you, Tarrian?”
“It is not my place to say, colonel-commissar,” Tarrian said flatly.
“To hold the Wall, to keep the gates sealed, to give up all territory outside and to dig in for a sustained siege,
trusting the Shield, the Curtain Wall and the army strengths within Vervunhive to hold the enemy off forever, or at
least until the winter breaks them.”
They all looked round. As he finished speaking, Captain Daur shrugged, ignoring the murderous look the VPHC
commander was giving him. “The plans were circulated this morning, with a magenta clearance rating. I have no
reason to assume that clearance excluded senior echelon Guard officers.”
“Thank you, Daur,” Gaunt said. He looked back at Tarrian. “The generals and I wish to see Sturm and the marshal.
Immediately.”
Quietly, the quintet of ochre-clad troops picked their way down the corridor of the bombed-out workshop, moving
through the dust-filled air. Outside, a tank grated past down the river of debris that had once been Outhab Transit
Street 287/fd.
The soldiers wore ochre battledress, shiny, black leather webbing straps, and polished, newly stamped lasguns.
On their heads were full-face composite helmets with flared, sneering features like blurred skulls and the crest of
Ferrozoica inlayed on the brow.
The squad checked each doorway and damage section they came to. Gol Kolea could hear the hollow crackle of
their terse vox-signals barking back and forth.
He slid back into cover and made a hand gesture that his company could read. They moved back, swallowed by
the shadows and the dust.
Gol let the five troopers advance down the corridor far enough until the last one was standing on the false
flooring. Then he connected the bare end of the loose wire in his hand to the terminals of the battery pack.
The concussion mine tore out a length of the corridor and obliterated the last trooper where he stood, tearing the
one directly in front of him into pieces with fragments of shrapnel and shards of bone from his exploded comrade.
The other three fell, then scrambled up, firing blind in the smoke. Bright, darting bars of las-fire pierced the smoke
cover like reef fish scudding through cloudy water.
Gol smashed out his fake wall and came down on the first of them from the rear, swinging the hook-bill of his axerake
down through helmet and skull.
Sergeant Haller dropped down from the ceiling joists where he had been crouching and felled another of them,
killing him with point-blank shots from his autopistol as his bodyweight flattened the trooper.
The remaining Zoican bastard switched to full auto and swung wild. His withering close-range shots punched right
through a flak-board wall partition and blew the guts and thighs out of Machinesmith Vidor, who had been waiting to
spring out from behind it.
Nessa came out of cover under some loose sacking and slammed the rock-knife into the back of the Zoican’s neck.
She held on, screaming and yanking at the blood-slick knife-grip as the trooper bucked convulsively. By the time he
dropped, his head was nearly sawn off.
Gol hurried forward, picking Nessa up and pulling her off the corpse. She handed the bloody rock knife to him,
shaking.
“Keep it,” he mouthed. She nodded. Eardrums ruptured by a close shell on the seventh day, she would never hear
again without expensive up-hive surgery and implants — which meant simply she would never hear again. She was a
trainee medic from the outer habs. Not the lowest of the low, but way, way down in the hive class system.
“You did good,” Gol signed. She smiled, but the fear in her eyes and the blood on her face diffused the power of
the expression and diluted the beauty of the young woman.
“Not so easy,” she signed back. She’d learned to sign her remarks early on. Captain Fencer, the Emperor save his
soul, had trained her well and explained how she could not modulate the volume of her own voice now she was
deaf.
Gol looked round. Haller and the other members of Gol’s team had recovered four working lasguns, two
laspistols and a bunch of ammunition webs from the dead by then.
“Go! Move!” Gol ordered, emphasising his words with expressive sign-gestures for the deaf. Of his company of
nine, six were without hearing. He took a last look at Vidor’s corpse and nodded a moment of respect. He had liked
Vidor. He wished the brave machinesmith had found the chance to fight. Then he followed his company out.
They moved out of the workshop, circuiting back around through a side alley and into a burned-out Ecclesiarchy
chapel. The bodies of the Ministorum brothers lay all around, venting swarms of flies. They had not abandoned their
holy place, even when the shells began to fall.
Haller crossed to the altar, straightened the slightly skewed Imperial eagle and knelt in observance. Tears dripped
down his face, but he still remembered to sign his anguish and his prayer to the Emperor rather than speak it. Gol
noticed this, and was touched and impressed by the soldier’s dual devotion to the Emperor and to their continued
safety.
Gol got his company into the chapel, spreading them out to cover the openings and find the obvious escape routes.
The ground shook as tank rounds took out the workshop where they had sprung their trap.
In the cover of the explosions, he dared to speak, signing at the same time. “Let’s find the next ones to kill,” he
said.
“A squad of six, moving in from the west,” hissed loom-girl Banda, setting down her lasgun and peering out of a
half-broken lancet window.
“Drill form as before,” Gol Kolea signed to his company, “Form on me. Let’s set the next snare.”
Lord Heymlik Chass sent his servitors and bodyguard away. The chief of the guard, Rudrec, his weapon dutifully
shrouded, tried to refuse, but Chass was not in the mood for argument.
Alone in the cool, gloomy family chapel of House Chass, high up in the Main Spine upper sectors, the lord prayed
diligently to the soul of the undying Emperor. The ghosts of his ancestors welled up around him, immortalised in
statuary. Heymlik Chass believed in ghosts.
They spoke to him.
He unlocked the casket by the high altar between the family stasis-crypts with a geno-key that had been in his
family for generations. He raised the velvet-padded lid, hearing the moan of ancient suspensor fields, and lifted out
Heironymo’s Amulet.
“What are you doing, father?” Merity Chass asked. His daughter’s voice startled him and almost made him drop
the precious thing.
“Merity! You shouldn’t be here!” he murmured.
“What are you doing?” she asked again, striding forward under the flaming sconces of the chapel, her green velvet
dress whispering as she moved.
“Is that…” Her voice trailed away. She could not utter the words.
“Yes. Given to our house by Great Heironymo himself.”
“You’re not thinking of using it! Father!”
He stared down into her pained, beautiful face.
“Go away, my daughter. This is not for your eyes.”
“No!” she barked. She so reminded him of her mother when she turned angry that way. “I am grown, I am the heir,
female though I may be. Tell me what you are doing!”
Chass sighed and let the weight of the amulet play in his hands. “What I must, what is good for the hive. There was
a reason Old Heironymo bequeathed this to my father. Salvadore Sondar is a maniac. He will kill us all.”
“You have raised me to be respectful of the High House, father,” she said, a slight smile escaping her frown. That
was her mother again, Heymlik noticed.
“It amounts to treason,” his daughter whispered.
He nodded and his head sank. “I know what it amounts to. But we are on the very brink now. Heironymo always
foretold this moment.”
He hugged her. She felt the weight of the amulet in his hands against her back.
“You must do what you must, father,” Merity said.
Like a slow, pollen-gathering insect, a vox drone hummed lazily in the chapel and crossed to the embracing
figures. It bleeped insistently. Chass pulled away from his daughter, savouring the sweet smell of her hair.
“A vote is being taken in the Upper Legislature. I must go.”
Bumbling like a moth, the drone hovered in front of the Noble Lord, leading him out of the chamber.
“Father?”
Heymlik looked back at his beloved child, hunched and frightened by the cold, marble familial crypt.
“I will support you in whatever you do, but you must tell me what you decide. Don’t keep me in the dark.”
“I promise,” he said.
The Privy Council was a circular theatre set on the Spine-floor above the spectacular main hall of the Legislature,
and it was reserved for the noble houses only. The domed roof was a painted frieze of the Emperor and the godmachines
of Mars hovering in radiant clouds. Columns of warm, yellow light stabbed down from the edges of the
circular ceiling and lit the velvet thrones of the high houses. Apart from Chass, they were all there: Gavunda, Yetch,
Rodyn, Anko, Croe, Piidestro, Nompherenti and Vwik.
Marshal Croe stood by his brother, the old, wizened Lord Croe, in deep conference. Vice Marshal Anko, beaming
and obsequious, was introducing General Sturm to his resplendently gowned cousin, Lord Anko. Commissar Kowle
was diplomatically greeting Lords Gavunda and Nompherenti. Servants and house retainers thronged the place,
running messages, fetching silver platters of refreshments, or simply guarding their noble masters with shrouded
sidearms.
A gong sounded four strokes. The main gilt shutter at the east side of the room slid up into the ceiling with a hiss
and Master Legislator Anophy limped into the chamber, his opalescent robes glinting in the yellow light, his
beribboned tricorn nodding with each heavy shuffle he took across the embroidered carpet. He was using the long,
golden sceptre of his office as a stick. Child pages held his train and carried his gem-encrusted vox/pict drone and
Book of Hive-law before him on tasselled cushions.
Anophy reached his place. He adjusted the silver arm of the vox-phone and spoke. “Noble houses, your careful
attention.” All looked round and quickly took their places. Kowle, Sturm and the other military men withdrew to one
side.
Noble Chass’ seat was vacant.
Anophy thumbed through the data on a slate held up by one of his pages and he set a palsy-trembling finger to his
moist lips.
“A matter to vote. In all precision, before these houses, the ratification of the defence plans our noble friend,
General Noches Sturm, has drawn up. The matter need not be lengthened further by discourse. The Hive, Emperor
grant it wealth and longevity, awaits.”
Six assent runes, fizzling holograms, lit the air above Anophy. Rodyn and Piidestro houses voted against with
dark-tinged, threatening lights.
“Carried,” said Anophy simply. The Privy Council began chattering and moving again.
A shutter of herring-bone steel to the west side of the chamber slid open and Noble Chass, accompanied by his
bodyguard, entered the chamber. An awkward hush fell. It remained in place as Chass descended the steps, crossed
the chamber and took his appointed seat. Once they had folded his great, silk train over the throne back, his
bodyguard and servants stood away.
Chass gazed around the circular hall. Several of his fellow nobles did not meet his gaze.
“You have voted. I was not present.”
“You were summoned,” Lord Anko said. “If you miss the given time, your vote is forfeit.”
“You know the rules, noble lord,” wheezed Anophy.
“I know when I have been… excluded.”
“Come now!” Anophy said. “There is no exclusion in the upper parliament of Vervunhive. Given the extraordinary
circumstances of this situation, I will allow you to vote now.”
Chass looked around again, very conscious of the way Lord Croe would not look at him.
“I see the matter has been voted six to two. My vote, whichever way I meant to cast it, would be useless now.”
“Cast it anyway, brother lord,” gurgled Gavunda through the silver-inlaid, wire-box augmentor that covered his
mouth like an ornate, crouching spider.
Chass shook his head. “I spoil my vote. There is no point to it.”
A group of figures was entering through the east hatch. Commissar Tarrian was trying to delay them, but they
pushed past. It was Gaunt, Grizmund, Nash and their senior officers.
“I can scarce believe your guile, Sturm,” Nash spat, facing the other general. Gilbear moved forward to confront
the Roane commander, but Sturm held him back with a curt snap of his fingers.
Gaunt crossed directly to the Master Legislator’s place and took the data-slate from the hands of the surprised
page. He reviewed it.
“So, it’s true,” he said, looking up at Sturm and Marshal Croe.
“General Sturm’s strategic suggestions have been agreed and ratified by the Upper Council,” Vice Marshal Anko
said smoothly. “And I strongly suggest you, and the other off-world commanders with you, show some order of
respect and courtesy to the workings and customs of this high parliament. We will not have our ancient traditions
flouted by—”
“You’re all fools,” Gaunt said carelessly, setting the slate down and turning away, “if you care more for
ceremonial traditions than life. You’ve made a serious error here.”
“You’ve killed this hive and all of us with it!” Nash snapped, bristling with fury. Gaunt took the big Roane general
by the shoulder and moved him away from confrontation.
“I am surprised at you, marshal,” Grizmund said, his stiff anger just held in check, like an attack dog on a choke
chain, as he looked at Croe. “From our meetings, I’d believed your grasp of tactics was better than this.”
Marshal Croe got up. “I’m sorry at your unhappiness, General Grizmund. But General Sturm’s plan seems sound to
me. I have the hive to think of. And Commissar Kowle, who has — let’s be fair— actually encountered our foe,
concurs.”
Grizmund shook his head sadly.
“What would you have done?” Lord Chass asked.
There was a lot of shouting and protesting, all of it directed at Chass.
“Lord Chass has a right to know!” Ibram Gaunt’s clear, hard voice cut the shouting away. Gaunt turned to face the
nobleman. “After due observation, Generals Nash, Grizmund and I would have opened the south-west gates and
launched armour to meet them, infantry behind. A flanking gesture to front them outside of the Wall rather than give
up all we have.”
“Would that have worked?” Chass asked.
“We’ll never know,” Gaunt replied. “But we do know this: if we wait until they reach the Wall, where do we have
to fall back to after that?
“Nowhere.”
Noble Chass wanted to question further, but the Privy Council dissolved in uproar and Gaunt marched out, closely
followed by the furious Grizmund and Nash.
* * *
“Commissar? Commissar-colonel?” In the crowded promenade hall outside the Privy Council, where parliamentary
and house aides thronged back and forth with guilders and house ordinary delegates, Gaunt paused and turned. A tall,
grim-looking man in ornate body armour was pushing through the crowds after him, a satin-cloth covering the
weapon in his right hand. Gaunt sent his staff ahead with the other generals and turned to face the man. A household
bodyguard, he was sure.
The man approached and made a dutiful salute. “I am Rudrec, lifeguard of his excellency Lord Chass of Noble
House Chass. My lord requests a meeting with you at your earliest convenience.”
The man handed Gaunt a small token-seal, with the Imperial eagle on one side and the Chass coat-of-arms on the
other.
“With this, you may be admitted to House Chass at all times. My lord will await.”
Gaunt looked at the crest as the lifeguard bowed and departed, swallowed by the crowd.
Now what, he wondered?
Salvador Sondar half-woke, a dream teetering on the edge of memory. The water around him was sweet and warm,
and pink bio-luminescence glowed softly.
The chatter murmured at him, soft, soothing, compelling. It was there almost all the time now, asleep or awake.
Sondar listed in the water.
What? What is it? What do you want?
The southern outer habs were ablaze and ash-smog was being driven through the rubble-strewn streets by the crosswinds
surging cyclonically from the hottest blazes.
Despite fierce pockets of guerrilla resistance, the Zoican forces pushed up through the ruins in spaced phalanxes
of infantry and columns of armour — thousands of them — grinding ever north through the confusion.
The first of them were now just a kilometre from the Curtain Wall.
SEVEN
DEATH MACHINES
“Victory and Death are the twin sons of War.”
—Ancient proverb
The bombardment from the advancing Zoican land assault fell abruptly silent in the mid-morning of the twenty-fifth
day. Hive observers had been carefully tracking the advance of the enemy legions through the outer habs, but by day
twenty-two, the level of smoke and ash-clouds veiling the region made such a task impossible once again. Eerie
silence now fell.
No one doubted that this cessation of shelling signalled an imminent storm-assault of the Curtain Wall and House
Command ordered a swift redeployment to be made all along the southern defence sections. The Curtain Wall and
gates were already fully manned by the Vervun Primary troops, and now significant portions of the Volpone, Roane
and NorthCol armies were brought in to reinforce them. The Tanith Ghosts were also deployed to the frontline from
their chem plant billet where they had been killing the hours in fretful indolence and frustration. Gaunt kept some
platoons in reserve at the billet, but five platoons under Major Rawne were sent to the Hass West Fortress, and
another four under Colonel Corbec were moved to Veyveyr Gate in support of the three Vervun Primary and two
NorthCol companies already stationed there.
Corbec saw the vulnerability of Veyveyr Gate the moment he and his men arrived by transit truck. Superhuman
efforts had been made to clear sections of the ruined rail terminal and he and his troops rode in past pioneer teams
still clearing rubble or shaping it into effective barricade lines. The gate itself, seventy metres wide and a hundred
high, had been blockaded with wreckage, a lot of it burned-out rolling stock from the railhead. But there were no
great blast doors to seal it like at the other main Wall gates.
Corbec met with Colonel Modile and Major Racine, the ranking Vervun officers in the sector, and with Colonel
Bulwar of the NorthCol contingent. Modile was earnest and businesslike, though clearly very nervous about the
prospect of seeing action for the first time in his career. Corbec didn’t like the idea that the officer at the apex of the
command pyramid at Veyveyr was a combat virgin. The major, Racine, was a more likeable fellow, but he was dead
on his feet with fatigue. Corbec found out later that the Vervun Primary Officer had been awake for the best part of
three days straight, supervising the preparation of the Veyveyr defence.
Bulwar at least was a combat veteran who had seen action during the years of rebellion wars in the NorthCol
colonies on Verghast’s main satellite moon. He was a thickset man who wore the same regular, evergreen flakarmour
and fatigues as his men, though the braided cap and the crackling power claw marked him out instantly as a
command officer. As the four officers met around the chart table in Modile’s shelter, Corbec soon noticed the way
Modile deferred to Bulwar’s suggestions. Bulwar saw it too and in effect began to take command. All he had to do
was hint and speculate, and Modile would quickly take up the ideas and turn them into tactical policy as if they were
his own.
That’s fine and good now, thought Corbec, but what happens when the shooting starts? Without direct, confident
command, the defence would fall apart.
After the meeting, at which the Ghosts had been drawn to take position along the east flank, against the perimeter
of the Ore Works and Smeltery ruins, Corbec took Bulwar to one side.
“With respect, Modile’s a weak link.”
Bulwar nodded. “Agreed. I think the same of most of the Vervun Primary units. No experience. At least my forces
have had baptism enough in the moon war. But this is Vervunhive’s show and their House Command has authority
over us all, colonel.”
“We need a safeguard,” Corbec said flatly, scratching at his collar. There were damn lice in those chem barns.
“I’m not talking insubordination…”
“I know what you mean. My old call sign was ‘anvil’. Let that be a signal to co-ordinate orders above Modile’s
head if it becomes necessary. I won’t be hung out to dry by an inexperienced man. Even a well-meaning one like
Modile.”
Corbec nodded. He liked Bulwar. He hoped it wouldn’t come to that.
* * *
Another day passed, with only silence and smoke outside the Curtain Wall. Nerves began to fray. All the while the
shelling had been going on, there had at least been the illusion that a war was being fought. Waiting, the common
fighting man’s worst foe, began to take its toll. Anxious minds had time to worry, to fear, to anticipate. Nearly three
quarters of a million fighting men were in position at the southern Curtain Wall of Vervunhive, with nothing to do but
doze, fidget, gaze up at the spectral flashes and crackles of the Shield far above, and distress themselves with their
own imaginations.
The VPHC was busy. Sixty-seven deserters or suspected derelicts were executed in a twenty-four hour period.
On the afternoon of the twenty-seventh day, troops on the Wall top began to detect ominous grinding and clanking
noises emanating from the smoke cover below. Machine noises, vast servos, threshing gears, rattling transmissions,
creaking metal. It seemed that at any moment, the storm would begin.
But the noises simply continued until after dark and more urgently through the night. They were alien and
incomprehensible, like the calls of unseen creatures in some mechanical jungle.
The twenty-eighth day was silent. The machine noises ceased at dawn. By noon, the smoke had begun to clear,
especially after a rising wind from the southwest brought rain squalls in from the coast. But still visibility was low
and the light was poor. There was nothing to see but the grey blur of the mangled outhabs.
On the twenty-ninth day, spotters on the Wall near Sondar Gate sighted a small group of Zoican tanks moving along a
transit track adjacent to the Southern Highway, two kilometres out. With hurried permission from House Command in
the Main Spine, they addressed six missile batteries and a trio of earthshaker guns and opened fire. There was
jubilation all along the defence line, for no greater reasons than the soldiers finally had a visible enemy to target and
the fighting drought was broken. The engagement lasted twelve minutes. No fire was returned from the enemy. When
the shell-smoke cleared, there was no sign of the tanks that had been fired upon — not even wreckage.
During the evening of that day, the machine noises from outside grumbled and clanked again, sporadically.
Marshal Croe made a morale-boosting speech to the population and the troops over the public-address plates. It
helped ease the tension, but Gaunt knew Croe should have been making such speeches daily for the last week. Croe
had only spoken now on the advice of Commissar Kowle. Despite his dislike of the man, Gaunt saw that Kowle truly
understood the political necessities of war. He was enormously capable. Kowle issued a directive that evening
urging all commissarial officers, both the VPHC and the regular Guard, to tour the lines and raise the mood. Gaunt
had been doing just that since his units went into position, shuttling between Hass West and Veyveyr. On these tours,
he had been impressed by the resolve and discipline of the Vervun Primary troopers who manned the defences
alongside his men. He prayed dearly to the beloved Emperor that combat wouldn’t sour that determination.
On that evening, riding his staff car down the inner transits to check on Rawne’s units at Hass West, Gaunt found
the seal Lord Chass’ bodyguard had given to him in his coat pocket. There had been no time thus far to pay the noble
a visit. Gaunt turned the token over in his gloved hand as the car roared down a colonnaded avenue. Perhaps tonight,
after his inspection of Hass West.
He never got the chance. Just before midnight, as Gaunt was still climbing the stairs of the fort’s main tower, the
first Zoican storm began.
Despite the military preparations, no one in the hive was really prepared for the onslaught. It fell so suddenly. Its
herald was a simultaneous salvo from thousands of tanks and self-propelled guns prowling forward through the
outer-hab wastes less than a kilometre from the Wall. The roar shook the hive and the explosive display lit the night
sky. For the first time, the enemy was firing up at the Curtain Wall, point-blank in armour terms, hitting wall-top
ramparts and fracturing them apart. Precision mortar bombardments were landing on the wall-top itself, finding the
vulnerable slit between Wall and Shield. Other ferocious rains of explosive force hammered at the gates or chipped
and flaked ceramite armour off the Wall’s face.
The defenders reeled, stunned. Hundreds were already dead or seriously injured and the ramparts were
significantly damaged in dozens of places. Officers rallied the dazed soldiery and the reply began. With its rocket
towers, heavy guns, support-weapon emplacements, mortars and the thousands of individual troopers on the
ramparts, that reply was monumental. Once they began to fight, a gleeful fury seized the men of Vervunhive. To
address the enemy at last. To fire in anger. It felt good after all the waiting. It was absolving.
The Curtain Wall firepower decimated the Zoican forces now advancing towards the Wall-foot outside.
Vervunhive laid down a killing field four hundred metres deep outside their Wall and obliterated tanks and men as
they churned forward. It was later estimated that 40-50,000 Zoican troops and upwards of 6,000 fighting vehicles
were lost to Vervunhive fire in the first hour of attack.
But the sheer numbers of the enemy were overwhelming, both physically and psychologically. No matter how
many hundreds were killed, thousands more moved forward relentlessly to take their place, marching over the
corpses of the slain. They were mindless and without fear in the face of the mass slaughter. Observing this from his
trench position just inside Veyveyr Gate, Brin Milo reflected that this was precisely what he had been afraid of: the
insane tactics of Chaos that Vervunhive’s war plans simply did not take into account.
“You could fire a lasgun on full auto from the wall-top,” wrote General Xance of the NorthCol forces later, “and
kill dozens, only to see the hole you’d made in their ranks close in the time it took to change power cells. If war is
measured by the number of casualties inflicted, then even in that first night, we had won. Sadly, that is not the case.”
“So many, so many…” were the last words spoken into his vox-set by a mind-numb Vervun Primary officer at
Sondar Gate just before one of the VPHC shot him and took control of his frazzled forces.
At Hass West, Gaunt arrived on the main rampart just after a mortar round had taken out a section of wall-lip and
blown the head off Colonel Frader, the commander of the area section. Gaunt took command, calling up a Vervun
Primary vox-officer and grabbing the handset from his pack. Gaunt was accompanied by Liaison Officer Daur, who
confidently relayed vocal commands to the troops in earshot. Gaunt was glad of him. Daur knew the tower and knew
the men from his time stationed here, and they responded better to an officer of their own. Many had seemed
overawed by the Imperial commissar. Gaunt accepted that fear was a command tool, but he loathed what the iron
rule of the VPHC had done to the resolve of the local troops.
Gaunt reached Rawne on the vox-link. The major had the Tanith strength spread out along the lower towers and
wall-line below the main fort.
“No casualties here,” the major reported, his voice punctuated by cracks and pops of static. “We’re pouring it on,
but there are so many!”
“Stay as you are! Keep up the address! We know they won’t break like a normal army, but you and I have faced
this enemy before, Rawne. You know how to win this!” \
“Kill them all, colonel-commissar?”
“Kill them all, Major Rawne!” And for all he personally trusted the man no further than he could throw him, Gaunt
knew that was exactly what Rawne would do.
“What’s that?” bellowed Feygor, firing over the buttress. Rawne ducked along to him. “What?”
Feygor pointed down. An armoured machine, three times the size of a main battle tank, was advancing towards the
wall’s skirt, a huge derrick of armour-plated scaffolding growing out of its top.
“Siege engine! For feth’s sake! Get on the vox, tell Gaunt!”
Feygor nodded.
Rawne scrambled closer to the lip and the las-storm below. “Bragg! Bragg!”
The big trooper crawled over, hefting his missile launcher.
“Kill it!”
Bragg nodded and raised the launcher to his shoulder, then banged off three rockets that curled down towards the
vast engine on plumes of blue smoke. They hit the superstructure and ignited, but no serious damage was done.
“Reload! Again!”
The monstrous siege engine reached the foot of the Wall and there was a shrieking sound as the metal tower
scraped against the ceramite and stone facings. Gas-fired anchor ropes were shot into the Curtain Wall to hold the
engine in place. Hydraulic feet extended beneath the armour skirts of the engine to steady it on the broken ground.
With a wail of metal, the derrick tower began to telescope up, extending to match the height of the wall. Segmented
armour, badged with the Zoican crest and other, less human insignias that made Rawne sick to see them, unfurled
upwards to protect the rising throat of the siege tower.
At the same time, the base unit of the vast machine opened a well-protected hatch in its rear and Zoican troops
began to pour into it.
The tower-top rose above the wall’s lip, forty metres from Rawne. Hydraulic arms wheezed out and gripped the
buttress, steel claws biting into the ceramite. The tower-top was an armoured structure with heavy flamer mounts
positioned either side of a hatch opening.
“Get down! Get down!” Rawne bellowed.
The flamers drenched the top of the Wall with liquid fire, swivelling to rake the defences back and forth. Forty
Vervun Primary troopers and nine Ghosts were incinerated as they fled back from the engine.
In addition to the shrieking flamers, automatic grenade launchers on the tower-top whirred and began to lob
explosives out like hail. Multiple detonations exploded along the scorched wall.
Rawne fell into cover behind a bulwark with Bragg, Feygor and several other Ghosts. Feygor was firing his
lasgun at the tower, but his shots were simply dinking off the armoured superstructure. Vervun troops, some on fire,
fled past them.
“Bragg!”
“Got a blockage,” replied the giant, fighting with his launcher.
“Load him!” Rawne ordered Trooper Gyrd.
Gyrd, a grizzled Ghost in his forties, swung in behind Bragg as the big man got the launcher settled on his
shoulder. The older Ghost fed fresh rockets into the load-cylinders of the massive weapon.
“Clear!” bawled Bragg as he sent a missile directly at the tower head. It blew the left-hand flamer mount clean off
and ignited a huge fireball of venting prometheum. But the armoured delivery section remained unscathed.
“Wait, wait…” hissed Rawne. The skin on the left-hand side of his face was blackened and scorched by the flamer
wash. If he lived till morning, he’d have what the Guard called a “flamer-tan.”
“For what?” barked Feygor. “Another moment and that hatch’ll open. Then the bastards will be all over us!”
“For half a moment, then. We can’t make a dent on this thing, so we wait for that hatch.”
The remaining flamer point raked back and forth, its white-hot fires beginning to blister the stone. Then it cut off
and drips of fluid fire pooled out of its blackened snout. The grenade throwers stopped whirring.
The storm hatch opened with a shriek. For a scant second, the wall defenders saw the first of the ochre-armoured
Zoican troops waiting to deploy out into Vervunhive.
Bragg fired three missiles, one of which went wide. The remaining pair disappeared into the hatchway. The
tower-top blew out from within. Secondary explosions rippled down the tower structure and ablaze from inside, it
toppled and crumpled with a tearing, metallic wail.
The defenders cheered wildly.
“Move back in! Cover the wall!” urged Rawne.
Six more siege engines had crawled forward towards the Curtain Wall in the time it had taken Rawne to repel the
first.
Relentless fire from missile batteries had taken one apart before it could deploy, just short of the Sondar Gate.
Another reached the Curtain Wall intact but positioned itself in front of an Earthshaker heavy battery in the Wall side.
The massive, long-range cannons blew it apart point-blank, though the crews were fried by the flaming backwash
that rushed into their silos.
A third reached Sondar Gate and deployed successfully, rising and clamping to the gatehouse top and then torching
everything and everyone on the emplacement before opening its hatch and disgorging wave after wave of Zoican
heavy troopers. The Vervun Primary forces were annihilated by this assault, but Volpone units from the neighbouring
ramparts, under the command of Colonel Corday, scissored in to meet the invasion.
Some of the fiercest fighting of the First Storm took place then, with twenty units of Volpone Bluebloods, including
a detachment of the elite 10th Brigade under Major Culcis, undertaking a near hand-to-hand battlement fight with
thousands of Zoican storm troops. The regular Bluebloods wore the grey and gold body armour of their regiment,
with the distinctive low-brimmed bowl helmets. The elite 10th had carapace armour, matt-black hellguns and bright
indigo eagle studs pinned into their armaplas collar sections. Culcis, who had won himself a valour medal on
Vandamaar, was young for a member of the tenth elite, but his superiors had rightly noticed his command qualities.
Despite seventy per cent losses, he held Sondar Gate through nothing more than tactical surety and brute
determination.
The top of Sondar Gate and the walls adjacent were thick with corpses. Culcis and his immediate inferior,
Sergeant Mantes of the regular Volpone, tried to disable the siege engine with tank mines. Mantes died in the attempt,
but the mines blew the support claws off the tower and it collapsed soon after under its own weight. Culcis, who had
lost a hand in the detonation of the mines, reformed his forces and slaughtered all the remaining Zoicans who had
made the wall-top. For the first of what would be three serious attempts, Sondar Gate resisted the enemy.
The fourth siege engine reached the Wall east of Sondar Gate, midway along the stretch that curved round to
Veyveyr. Here Roane Deepers were in position, hard-nosed shock troops in tan fatigues and netted helmets. General
Nash was in command in person and he mobilised the wall batteries to target the tower neck as it extended up
towards them. The ripples of missiles didn’t destroy it, but they damaged some internal mechanism and the tower
jammed at half-mast, unable to reach the Wall top and engage. It raked upwards with its flamers and grenades
spitefully, and Nash lost more than forty men. But it could not press its assault and remained hunched outside the
Curtain Wall, broken and derelict, for the remainder of the war.
The other two siege engines assaulted Hass West Fort.
Gaunt saw then coming, slow and inexorable, and drew up his heavy weapons. He’d seen the system of assault
through his scope watching Rawne’s position, and he didn’t want it duplicated here.
Under his voxed commands, the wall batteries strafed the nearest engine heavily and succeeded in blowing it
apart. The upper section of the tower, beginning to telescope, snapped off to the left in a fireball, destroying the base
unit as it collapsed.
But despite Gaunt’s efforts, the second siege engine reached the western portions of the ramparts and engaged its
clamps. The tower hoisted into position.
Gaunt ordered his men back from the surrounding area as the flamers retched and blasted and the grenades rained.
In cover next to him, Captain Daur pulled off his sling.
“Your arm?”
“Stuff that, commissar! Give me a gun!”
Gaunt handed the Vervun captain his bolt pistol and then cycled his chainsword. “Prepare yourself, Daur. This is
as bad as it ever gets.”
Zoican troops spilled out of the tower top, thousands of them. They were met by the Ghosts and the Vervun
Primary. Another infamous episode of the First Storm began.
Just before Gaunt’s positions destroyed the first of the two engines, other Zoican death machines clanked out of the
outhab wastes and assaulted the walls: a half-dozen tank-like vehicles, quickly dubbed the “flat-crabs” by the Vervun
troopers because of their resemblance to the edible crustaceans farmed in the Hass Estuary. They were the size of
four or five tanks together, covered in a shell-like carapace of overlapped armour like huge beetles or horseshoe
molluscs. A single, super-heavy weapon extended up from their dorsal mounts and they drummed the Wall with fastcycle
fire that shattered masonry and adamantine blocks.
The flat-crabs were siege-crackers, massive weapons designed to break open even the strongest fortifications.
Two of them, with dorsal mounts slung to face forward and armed with massive rams, assaulted the gates at Hass
West and Sondar. As they advanced, regular tanks, tiny by comparison, moved in beside them. The tidal wave of
ochre-clad troops was undiminished.
Then it was the turn of the spiders, the largest and most fearsome of the Zoican siege weapons. A hundred metres
long from nose to tail and propelled by eight vast, clawed cartwheels set on cantilever arms extending from the main
bodies of their armoured structures, the spiders ground out of the smoke and rumbled towards the Wall. Gun and
rocket batteries on their backs blazed up at the defences of Vervunhive.
When they reached the Curtain Wall, the spiders didn’t stop. The wheel claws dug into the ceramite and raised the
death machines up the face of the defence, climbing like insects up the sheer face of the massive Wall. Of all the
siege engines deployed at Vervunhive, the Zoican spiders came closer to taking the hive than anything else that night.
There were five of them. One was destroyed by the Wall guns as it advanced. Another was immobilised by rocket
fire twenty metres short of the Wall and then set on fire by further salvos.
The other three made it to the walls and hauled their immense bulks upwards, screeching into adamantium and
ceramite as they dug with their wheeled claws. One was stopped by the VPHC Commissar Vokane, who got his
troops to roll munitions from the launcher dumps to the Wall head and tip them over onto the rising beast, charges set
for short fuse. The spider was blown off the wall and fell backwards, crushing hundreds of Zoican troops under it. It
lay on its back and burned. Vokane and fifty-seven of his men didn’t live to cheer. The explosive backwash of the
spider’s death engulfed them and burned them to bone scraps.
The second spider made it to Veyveyr Gate and began to claw at the barricades. Its mighty wheels sliced and
crushed rail stock apart as it pulled itself in through the gate opening. Heavy artillery and NorthCol armour units met
it with a pugnacious blitz of fire as it pushed its head through the gateway and they blew it apart. It settled sideways
on its exploded wheels, half-blocking the entrance.
The remaining spider clawed its way over the Curtain Wall west of Hass West Fort. General Grizmund was
waiting for it. As it scattered and burned the Wall defenders to left and right, Grizmund’s Narmenian tanks,
assembled in the open places of the House Anko chem works, elevated and fired, blasting the vast thing backwards
off the Curtain Wall. The force of the salvo took part of the inner wall down too, but it was considered worthwhile.
The spider was destroyed.
At Hass West, Gaunt’s men met the tide of Zoicans spilling from the engaged siege engine. In the narrow defiles of
the ramparts, it became a match of determined close combat. Gaunt personally killed dozens with his chainsword
and cut a flanking formation down towards the tower-top of the engine. Daur was with him, blasting with his
borrowed boltgun, and so were a pack of more than sixty Ghosts and Vervun Primary troopers mixed together.
Squads under Varl and Mkoll joined them, and Gaunt was gratified that they seemed to be killing the storm troops
as fast as the foes could stream out of the boarding tower.
Gaunt heard a yell through the confusion and looked up to see Commissar Kowle leading fifty or so Vervun
Primary troops in an interception along the lower battlements.
Between them, Gaunt realised, they had the enemy pinned.
“I need explosives!” he hissed back to Daur. The captain called up a grenadier with fat pouches of tube mines and
antipersonnel bombs.
“All of them!” spat Gaunt. “Into the neck of that thing! Come with me!”
Gaunt advanced through the enemy waves, his chainsword biting blood, armour shards, hair and flesh from them.
He cut a space to the tower head and then yelled for the grenadier to follow up. A las-shot tore through the
grenadier’s brow and he fell.
Gaunt caught him. “Daur!”
Daur ran forward and helped the commissar. Together, they lifted the corpse, laden with its strings of explosives,
and carried it to the open mouth of the tower. Gaunt pulled out a stick charge, set it, pushed it back into the corpse’s
webbing and together they flung the dead soldier down through the mouth of the siege tower.
The grenade went off a couple of seconds later. A bare millisecond after that, the rest of his munitions exploded as
he fell, touched off by the first bomb.
The tower shuddered and broke, falling headlong into the sea of Zoicans milling at the foot of the Curtain Wall.
Kowle’s forces moved in, killing the last of the Zoicans on the ramparts.
At two in the morning, just into the thirtieth day, the Zoican assault stopped and the Zoicans withdrew into the
smouldering shadows of the outhabs. Flat-crabs wallowed backwards into the smoke, escorted by files of Zoican
tanks and legions of ochre troops. An Imperial victory hymn was played at full volume from every broadcast speaker
in the hive.
Vervunhive had lost 34,000 troops, twenty missile emplacements, fifty gun posts and ten heavy artillery silos. The
Curtain Wall was scarred and wounded and, in several places, fractured to the point of weakness.
But the First Storm had been resisted.
EIGHT
HARM’S WAY
“The first trick a political officer of the Commissariat learns is: learn to lie. The second is: trust no one. The
third: never get involved with local politics.”
—Commissar-General Delane Oktar, from his Epistles to the Hyrkans
Processions of Ministorum Priests, the high faithful of the Imperial Cult, moved through the stone vaults of Inner Hab
Collective Medical Hall 67/mv. They carried tapers and smoking censers, and chanted litanies of salvation and
blessing for the wounded and dying now engulfing the place. Long, frail strips of parchment inscribed with the
speeches of the Emperor trailed behind them like sloughs of snakeskin, dangling from the prayer boxes they carried.
Surgeon Ana Curth nodded respectfully to the clerics each time she encountered them in the wards and hallways of
the medical facility, but privately she cursed them. They were in the way and they terrified some of the weaker or
more critically injured who saw them as soul-catchers come to draw them from this life. Spiritual deliverance was
all very well, but there was a physical crisis at hand, one in which any able personnel would help more by tending
the bodies rather than the spirits.
The Zoican assault had brought convoys of new casualties to all the inner hive medical halls, places already
barely coping with the sick and injured refugees from the first phase of the conflict. Military field hospitals and
medical stations were being set up to help, and the medical officers and staff that had arrived with the Imperial
Guard forces were proving to be invaluable. Curth and her colleagues were community medics with vast experience
in every walk of life — except combat injuries.
It was evening on the thirtieth day and Curth had been on duty for nearly twenty hours. After the nightmare of the
storm assault the previous night, the fighting had slowed, with nothing more than random exchanges of shelling from
both sides across the litter of Zoican dead outside the Wall.
Or so Curth had heard from passing soldiers and Administratum officials. She’d barely had time to raise her head
above the endless work. She paused to scrub her hands in a water bath, partly to clean them but mainly to feel the
refreshingly cold liquid on her fingers. She looked up to see groups of dirty Vervun Primary troopers wheeling a
dozen or more of their wounded comrades down the hall on brass gurneys. Some of the wounded were whimpering.
“No! No!” she cried out. “The west wards are full! Not that way!”
Several troopers protested.
“Weren’t you briefed on admittance? Show me your paperwork.”
She checked the crumpled, mud — and blood-stained admission bills one trooper handed her.
“No, this is wrong,” she murmured, shaking her head as she read. “They’ve filled out the wrong boxes. You’ll
have to go back to the main triage station.”
More protests. She took out her stylus and over-wrote the details of the bills, signing them and scorching her sealmark
on the paper with a brief flash of her signet ring.
“Back,” she told them with authority. “Back that way and they’ll look after you.”
The troopers retreated. Curth turned, now hearing raised voices in Ward 12/g nearby.
Ward 12/g had been filled with refugees from the outhabs, most of them fever-sick or undernourished. Days of
careful feeding and anti-fever inoculations had improved things, and she was hoping to be able to discharge many of
them back to the refugee camps in the next day or two. That would make some valuable space.
She entered the arch-ceilinged ward: a long, green-washed, stone chamber with seven hundred cots. Some were
screened. Other cot spaces were crowded with the families of the patients who had refused to be separated from
their kin. There was a warm, cloying smell of living bodies and dirt in the air.
The shouting was coming from a cot-space halfway down the ward. Two of her orderlies, distinct in their red
gowns from the grimy patients, were trying to calm an outhab worker as gaggles of other outhabbers looked on. The
worker was a large male with no obvious injuries but a wasted, pale complexion. He was yelling and making
nervous, threatening gestures at the orderlies.
Curth sighed. This wasn’t the first such incident. Like far too many of the impoverished underclass, the worker
was an obscura addict, hooked on the sweet opiate as a relief from his miserable shift-life. Obscura was cheaper, hit
for hit, than alcohol. He probably used a waterpipe or maybe an inhaler. When the invasion began, the workers had
fled in-hive. Now many of them were regretting leaving their opiate stashes behind in their desperation. She’d had
ninety or more admitted with what at first seemed like the symptoms of gastric fever. After a few days of support and
food, this had turned out to be withdrawal cramps.
Strung out, some addicts demanded medicinal drugs to ease their agonies. Others got through the withdrawal
phases. Still others became violent and unreasonable. For a few — the chronic, long-term users — she had been
forced to prescribe ameliorating tranquillisers.
Curth stepped between her orderlies and faced the man, her hands raised in a gesture of calm.
“I’m chief surgeon,” she said softly. “What’s your name?”
The worker snarled something inarticulate, foam flecking his chin as his jaw worked. His eyes showed too much
white.
“Your name? What’s your name?”
“N-Norand.”
“How long have you been using obscura, Norand?”
Another squeal of not-words. A stammering.
“How long? It’s important.”
“S-since I was a j-journeyman…”
Twenty years at least. A lifelong abuser. There could be no reasoning here. Curth doubted the worker would ever
be able to kick the habit that was destroying his brain.
“I’ll get something for you right now that will help you feel better, Norand. You just have to be calm. Can you do
that?”
“D-drugs?” he muttered, chewing at his lips.
She nodded. “Can you be calm now?”
The worker quivered his head and sat back on his cot, panting and raking the sheets with his fingers.
Curth turned to her orderlies. “Get me two shots of lomitamol. Move it!” One of the orderlies hurried off. She sent
the other away to encourage patients back to their cots.
There was a pause in the background noise of the ward, just for a second. Curth had her back to the worker and
realised her oh-so-very-basic mistake. She turned in time to see him leaping at her, lips drawn back from his rotting
teeth, a rusty clasp-knife in one hand.
Wondering stupidly how in the name of the Emperor he’d got that weapon into the hall unchecked, she managed to
sidestep. The worker half-slammed into her and she went over backwards, overturning a water cart. The bottles
smashed on the tiles. The worker, making a high-pitched whining sound, stepped over the mess while trying to keep
his balance. He stabbed the knife at her and she cried out, rolling aside and cutting her arm on the broken glass. She
scrabbled to rise, expecting to feel him plant the blade in her back at any moment.
Turning, she saw him choking and gagging, held in a firm choke-hold from behind. Dorden, the Tanith medical
officer, had his left arm braced around the addict’s neck, his right hand holding the knife-wrist tightly at full length
away from them both. The addict gurgled. Dorden was completely tranquil. His hold was an expert move, just a
millimetre or two of pressure away from clamping the carotid arteries, just a centimetre away from dislocating the
neck. Only a brilliant medic or an Imperial assassin could be that precise.
“Drop it,” Dorden said into the worker’s ear.
“N-n-nggnnh!”
“Drop. It,” the Ghost repeated emphatically.
Dorden dug his thumb into a pressure point at the base of the man’s palm and the addict dropped his knife anyway.
The rusty weapon clattered to the floor and Curth kicked it aside.
Dorden increased his chokehold for a fraction of a second, enough for the man to black out, and then dropped him
facedown onto an empty cot. Orderlies hurried up.
“Restrain him. Give him the lomitamol, but restrain him all the same.”
He turned to Curth. “This is a war now, you know. You should have guards in here. Things get dangerous during
wars, even behind the lines.”
She nodded. She was shaking. “Thank you, Dorden.”
“Glad to help. I was coming to find you. Come on.” He picked up a clutch of data-slates and paper forms he had
dropped in order to engage the man, and he led her by the arm down the length of the ward to the exit.
In the cool of the corridor outside, she paused and leaned against the stone wall, taking deep breaths.
“How long have you been working? You need rest,” Dorden said.
“Is that a medical opinion?”
“No, a friend’s.”
She looked up at him. She had still to get the measure of this off-worlder, but she liked him. And he and his Tanith
medics had been the backbone of the combat triage station.
“You’ve been up as long as me. I saw you working at midnight last night.”
“I nap.”
“You what?”
“I nap. Useful skill. I’d rate it slightly higher than suturing. I know all the excuses about there being no time for
sleep. I’ve used them myself. Hell, I’ve been a doctor for a lot of years. So I learned to nap. Ten minutes here, five
there, in any lull. Keeps you fresh.”
She shook her head and smiled.
“Where do you nap?” she asked.
He shrugged. “I’ve found there’s a particularly comfortable linen cupboard on the third floor. You should try it.
You won’t be disturbed. They never change the beds in this place anyway.”
That made her laugh. “I… thank you for that.”
He shrugged again. “Learn the lessons, Surgeon Curth. Make time to nap. Trust your friends. And never turn your
back on an obscura addict with a rusty knife.”
“I’ll remember,” she said over-solemnly.
They walked down the hallway together, passing two crash-teams racing critical cases to the theatre.
“You were coming to find me?”
“Hmm,” he said, reminded, sheafing through the documents he was carrying. “It’s nothing, really. You’ll think it
stupid, but I have a thing about details. Another lesson, if you’re in the mood for more. Take care of the details, or
they’ll bite you on the bloody arse.”
He stopped, looked at her and coloured. “My apologies. I’ve been in the company of foul-mouthed soldiers for too
long.”
“Accepted. Tell me about this detail.”
“I was in Intensive Ward 471/k, reviewing the situation. They are mostly inhab citizens up there, injured in the
first raid. We’ve got blast wounds, shrapnel-hits, burn-cases, crush-injuries — a world of bad stuff, actually. They
were all in the Commercia district when the bombs fell. Specifically,” he consulted the slates, “Carriage Station
C4/a and the eastern barter houses.”
She took the slate from him. “Well?”
“I was checking to see if any could be discharged or at least moved to a non-intensive ward to make room. There
are maybe twelve who could be shifted to the common wards.”
“Well?” she repeated. “Was that it? An administrative suggestion?”
“No, no!” he said and leafed to another sheet. “I told you the sort of injuries we were getting up there: mostly from
the shelling, a few from panic stampedes. But there were two others, both in comas, critical. I… I was wondering
why they had gunshot wounds?”
“What?” She snatched the slates and studied them closely.
“Small calibre, maybe a needle gun. Easy to mistake it for shrapnel wounding.”
“It says ‘glass lacerations’ here. The station canopies all blew out and—”
“I know a needle-gun wound when I see it. And I’m seeing over a dozen shared between the two of them. They
were shot at close range. I checked the records. Twelve others were brought in from the same site with identical
wounds. But they were all dead on arrival.”
“This is the Commercia?”
“A subtransit station: C7/d. Not actually hit by direct shelling, so the records state. But there were at least twenty
bodies recovered there.”
She read the forms again and then looked up at him.
“You’re thinking what I’m thinking, aren’t you?” he smiled. “Hundreds of thousands, dead and dying, all needing
us and I’m worried about just two of them. I shouldn’t care how they were hurt, just that they need me.”
She paused. “Yes, I am thinking that… but…”
“Ah: ‘but’. Useful word. Why were they shot? Who was opening fire on helpless citizens in the middle of a raid?”
Despite her hours on duty, Ana Curth was suddenly awake again. Dorden was right: this was small compared to
the scale of the general human misery in Vervunhive. But it could not go unmarked. The Scholam Medicalis had
trained her to value every single life individually.
“Vervunhive is being murdered,” she said. “Most of the murderers are out there, wearing ochre armour. Some, I
have to say, are sitting pretty around the chart tables in House Command. But there is another — and we will find
him.”
Gaunt straightened his cap, smoothed the folds of a clean leather jacket and left his escort of six Tanith troops at the
elevator assembly. The escort, led by Caffran, stood easy, gazing around themselves at the lofty, gleaming
architecture of the upper Spine. None of them had ever expected to see the inside of a hive’s noble level.
“Even the fething lift has a carpet!” Trooper Cocoer hissed.
Gaunt looked round. “Stay here. Behave yourselves.”
The Ghosts nodded, then congregated around an ornamental fountain where foamy water bubbled from conches
held by gilt nymphs into a lily-skinned, green pool. Some of the Ghost guard rested their lasguns against the marble
lip. Gaunt smiled to see Caffran check that the seat of his pants was clean before sitting on the marble.
So out of place, he thought as he left them with a last look, six dirty dog-soldiers, fresh from battle, in the middle
of the serene vaults of the worthy and powerful.
He paced down the length of the promenade, his shiny boots hushing into the blue carpeting.
The air was perfumed and gentle plainsong echoed from hidden speakers. The vault above was glass, supported
by thin traceries of iron. Trees, real trees, grew in the centre beds of the long hall and small, bright songbirds
fluttered through the branches. This is the privilege of power, Gaunt thought.
The great doors, crafted from single pieces of some vast tree, stood before him, the crest of House Chass raised in
varnished bas-relief on their front. Ivy traces clad the walls to either side and small, blue flowers budded from fruit
trees in the avenue that led to the doorway. He took out the token-seal and fitted it into a knurled slot in the door lock.
The great doors swung inwards silently. There was a fanfare of choral voices. He stepped inside, entering a high
vault that was lit blue by the light falling through stained-glass oriels high above. The walls were mosaics, depicting
incidents and histories that were unknown to him. The Chass crest was repeated at intervals in the mosaic.
“Welcome, honoured visitor, to the enclave of House Chass. Your use of a token emblem signifies you to be an
invited and worthy guest. Please wait in the anteroom and refreshments will be sent while his lordship is informed of
your arrival.”
The servitor’s voice was smooth and warm, and it issued from the air itself. The great doors hushed closed behind
Gaunt. He removed his cap and gloves and set them on a teak side table.
A second later, the inner doors opened and three figures entered. Two were house guards dressed in body armour
identical to that of the one who had accosted Gaunt outside the Privy Council. They had satin shrouds over their
handweapons and nodded to him stiffly. The third, a female servitor, her enhancement implants and plugs made of
inlaid gold, carried a tray of refreshments on long, silver, jointed arms which supplemented her natural limbs.
She stopped before Gaunt. “Water, joiliq, berry wine, sweetmeats. Please help yourself, worthy guest. Or if
nothing pleases you, tell me, and I will attend your special needs.”
“This is fine,” Gaunt said. “A measure of that local liquor.”
Holding the salver with her extra arms, the female servitor gracefully poured Gaunt a shot of joiliq into a crystal
glass and handed it to him.
He took it with a nod and the servitor withdrew to the side of the room. Gaunt sipped the drink thoughtfully. He
was beginning to wonder why he had come. It was clear there was a universe of difference between himself and
Chass. What could they have in common?
“To be here you must have been invited, but I do not know you.”
Gaunt turned and faced a young noblewoman who had entered from the far side of the anteroom. She wore a long
gown of yellow silk, with a fur stole and an ornate headdress of silver wire and jewels. She was almost painfully
beautiful and Gaunt saw cunning intelligence in her perfect face.
He nodded respectfully, with a click of his heels.
“I am Gaunt, lady.”
“The off-world commissar?”
“One of them. Several of my stripe arrived with the Guard.”
“But you’re the famous one: Ibram Gaunt. They say the People’s Hero Kowle was beside himself with rage when
he heard the famous Gaunt was coming to Vervunhive.”
“Do they?”
The girl circled him. Gaunt remained facing the way he was.
“Indeed they do. War heroes Kowle can manage to stomach, so they report, but a commissar war hero? Famous for
his actions on Balhaut, Fortis Binary, the Menazoid Clasp, Monthax? Too much for Kowle. You might eclipse him.
Vervunhive is large, but there can be only one famous, dashing commissar hero, can’t there?”
“Perhaps. I’m not interested in rivalry. So… you’re versed in recent military history, lady?”
“No, but my maids are.” She smiled dangerously.
“Your maids have taken an interest in my record?”
“Deeply, you and your — what was it they said? Your ‘scruffy, courageous Ghost warriors’. Apparently, they are
so much more exciting than the starchy Volpone Bluebloods.”
“That I can vouch for,” he replied. Though she was lovely, he had already had enough of her superior manner and
courtly flirting. Responding to such things could get a man shot.
“I’ve six scruffy, courageous Ghost warriors right outside if you’d like me to introduce them to your maids,” he
smiled, “or to you.”
She paused. Outrage tried to escape her composed expression. She contained it well. “What do you want, Gaunt?”
she asked instead, her tone harder.
“Lord Chass summoned me.”
“My father.”
“I thought so. That would make you…”
“Merity Chass, of House Chass.”
Gaunt bowed gently again. He took another sip of the drink.
“What do you know of my father?” she asked crisply, still circling like a gaud-cock in a mating ritual.
“Master of one of the nine noble houses of Vervunhive. One of the three who opposed General Sturm’s tactical
policy. One who took an interest in my counterproposals. An ally, I suppose.”
“Don’t use him. Don’t dare use him!” she said fiercely.
“Use him? Lady—”
“Don’t play games! Chass is one of the most powerful noble houses and one of the oldest, but it is part of the
minority. Croe and Anko hold power and opposition. Anko especially. My father is what they call a liberal. He
has… lofty ideals and is a generous and honest man. But he is also guileless, vulnerable. A crafty political agent
could use his honesty and betray him. It has happened before.”
“Lady Chass, I have no designs on your father’s position. He summoned me here. I have no idea what he wants. I
am a warmaker, a leader of soldiers. I’d rather cut off my right arm than get involved in house politics.”
She thought about this. “Promise me, Gaunt. Promise me you won’t use him. Lord Anko would love to see my
noble house and its illustrious lineage overthrown.”
He studied her face. She was serious about this — guileless, to use her own word.
“I’m no intriguer. Leave that to Kowle. Simple, honest promises are something I can do. They are what soldiers
live by. So I promise you, lady.”
“Swear it!”
“I swear it on the life of the beloved Emperor and the light of the Ray of Hope.”
She swallowed, looked away, and then said, “Come with me.”
With her bodyguards trailing at a respectful distance, she led Gaunt out of the anteroom, along a hallway where soft,
gauzy draperies billowed in a cool breeze and out onto a terrace.
The terrace projected from the outer wall of the Main Spine and was covered by a dedicated refractor shield.
They were about a kilometre up. Below, the vast sprawl of Vervunhive spread out to the distant bulk of the Curtain
Wall. Above them rose the peak of the Spine, glossed in ice, overarched by the huge bowl of the crackling Shield.
The terrace was an ornamental cybernetic garden. Mechanical leaf-forms grew and sprouted in the ordered beds,
and bionic vines self-replicated in zigzag patterns of branches to form a dwarf orchard. Metal bees and delicate
paper-winged butterflies whirred through the silvery stems and iron branches. Oil-ripe fruit, black like sloes, swung
from blossom-joints on the swaying mechanical-tree limbs.
Lord Heymlik Chass, dressed in a gardener’s robes, slight marks of oil-sap on his cuffs and apron, moved down
the rows of artificial plants, dead-heading brass-petalled flowerheads with a pair of laser secateurs and pruning
back the sprays of aluminium roses.
He looked up as his daughter led the commissar over.
“I was hoping you would come,” Lord Chass said.
“I was delayed by events,” Gaunt said.
“Of course.” Chass nodded and gazed out at the south Curtain for a moment. “A bad night. Your men… survived?”
“Most of them. War is war.”
“I was informed of your actions at Hass West. Vervunhive owes you already, commissar.”
Gaunt shrugged. He looked around the metal garden.
“I have never seen anything like this,” he said honestly.
“A private indulgence. House Chass built its success on servitors, cogitators and mechanical development. I make
working machines for the Imperium. It pleases me to let them evolve in natural forms here, with no purpose other
than their own life.”
Merity stood back from the pair. “I’ll leave you alone, then,” she said.
Chass nodded and the girl stalked away between the wire-vines and the tin blooms.
“You have a fine daughter, lord.”
“Yes, I have. My heir. No sons. She has a gift for mechanical structures that quite dazzles me. She will lead House
Chass into the next century.”
He paused, snicked a rusting flowerhead off into his waist-slung sack and sighed. “If there is a next century for
Vervunhive.”
“This war will be won by the Imperial force, lord. I have no doubt.”
Chass smiled round at the commissar. “Spoken like a true political animal, Commissar Gaunt.”
“It wasn’t meant to be a platitude.”
“Nor did I take it as one. But you are a political animal, aren’t you, Gaunt?”
“I am a colonel of the Imperial Guard. A warrior for the almighty Emperor, praise His name. My politics extend
as far as raising troop morale, no further.”
Chass nodded. “Walk with me,” he said.
They moved through a grove of platinum trees heavy with brass oranges. Frills of wire-lace creepers were
soldered to the burnished trunks. Beyond the grove, crossing iron lawns that creaked under their footsteps, they
walked down a row of bushes with broad, inlaid leaves of soft bronze.
“I suppose my daughter has been bending your ear with warnings about my liberal ways?”
“You are correct, lord.”
Chass laughed. “She is hugely protective of me. She thinks I’m vulnerable.”
“She said as much.”
“Indeed. Let me show you this.” Chass led Gaunt into a maze of hedges. The hedgerows crackled with energised
life, like veils of illusions.
“Fractal topiary,” Chass said proudly. “Mathematical structures generated by the stem-forms of the cogitators
planted here.”
“It is a wonder.”
Lord Chass looked around at Gaunt. “It leaves you cold, doesn’t it, Gaunt?”
“Cold is too strong a word. It leaves me… puzzled. Why am I here?”
“You are an unusual officer, Gaunt. I have studied your record files carefully.”
“So have the housemaids,” Gaunt said.
Chass snorted, taking a cropping wand from his belt. He began to use it to shape the glowing, fractal hedges
nearby. “For different reasons, I assure you. The maids want husbands. I want friends. Your record shows me that
you are a surprisingly moral creature.”
“Does it?” Gaunt watched the noble trim the light-buds of the bush, disinclined to speak further.
“True to the Imperial Cause, to the crusade, but not always true to your direct superiors when those motives clash.
With Dravere on Menazoid Epsilon, for example. With our own General Sturm on Voltemand. You seek your own
way, and like a true commissar you are never negligent in punishing those of your own side who counter the common
good.”
Gaunt looked out across the vast hive below them. “Another sentence or two and you’ll be speaking treason, Lord
Chass.”
“And who will hear me? A man who roots out treason professionally? If I speak treason, Gaunt, you can kill me
here.”
“I hope we can avoid that, lord,” Gaunt said quietly.
“So do I. From the incident in the Privy Council the other day, I understand you do not agree with General Sturm’s
tactical plan?”
Gaunt’s measured nod spoke for him.
“We have something in common then. I don’t agree with House Sondar’s leadership either. Sondar controls Croe
and Anko is its lapdog. They will lead us to annihilation.”
“Such machinations are far above me, Lord Chass,” Gaunt pointed out diplomatically.
Chass wanded the hedge again. He was forming a perfect Imperial eagle from the blister-tendrils of light. “But we
are both affected. Bad policy and bad leadership will destroy this hive. You and I will suffer then.”
Gaunt cleared his throat. “With respect, is there a point to this, Lord Chass?”
“Perhaps, perhaps not. I wanted to speak with you, Gaunt, get the measure of you. I wanted to understand your
inner mind and see if there was any kindred flame there. I have a great responsibility to Vervunhive, greater than the
leadership of this noble house. You wouldn’t understand and I’m not about to explain it. Trust me.”
Gaunt said nothing.
“I will preserve the life of this hive to my dying breath — and beyond it if necessary. I need to know who I can
count on. You may go now. I will send for you again in time. Perhaps.”
Gaunt nodded and turned away. The Imperial eagle in the fractal topiary was now complete.
“Gaunt?”
He turned back. Lord Chass reached into his waist-sack and pulled out a rose. It was perfect, made of steel, just
budding and faintly edged with rust. The silver stem was stiff and aluminium thorns split out of it.
Chass held it out.
“Wear this for honour.”
Gaunt took the metal rose and hooked it into the lapel of his jacket, over his heart.
He nodded. “For honour, I’ll wear anything.”
Chass stood alone as Gaunt threaded his way out of the metal garden and departed. Chass remained stationary in
thought for a long time.
“Father?” Merity appeared out of the brass-orange grove.
“What did you make of him?”
“An honourable man. Slightly stiff, but not shy. He has spirit and courage.”
“Undoubtedly.”
“Can we trust him?”
“What do you think?”
Merity paused, stroking the fractal blooms absently.
“It’s your choice, master of our house.”
Heymlick Chass laughed. “It is. But you like him? That’s important. You asked me to keep you informed.”
“I like him. Yes.”
Chass nodded. He took the amulet from the waist sack where it had been all the time, buried in the garden scraps.
He turned it over in his hands. It writhed and clicked.
“We’ll know soon enough,” he told his daughter.
Day thirty-one passed without major incident. Shelling whined back and forth between the wall defenders and the
waiting Zoican army. At dawn on the thirty-second day, the second Zoican assault began.
NINE
VEYVEYR GATE
“Do not ask how you may give your life for the Emperor. Ask instead how you may give your death.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, on his deathbed
It was a dismal, hollow dawn. The early daylight was diffused by cliffs of grey cloud that prolonged the night. Rain
began to fall: spots at first for a half hour, then heavier, sheeting across the vastness of the hive and the wastelands
beyond. Visibility dropped to a few hundred metres. The torrential downpour made the Shield crackle and short in
edgy, disturbing patterns.
At the Veyveyr position, in the first hour of light, Colm Corbec walked the Tanith line, the eastern positions of the
ruined railhead. His piebald camo-cloak, the distinctive garb of the Tanith, was pulled around him like a shroud, and
he had acquired a wide-brimmed bowl helmet from somewhere — the NorthCol troops most likely — which made
more than a few of his Ghosts chuckle at the sight of it. It was cold, but at least the Shield high above was keeping
the rain off.
Corbec had surveyed the Ghost positions a dozen times and liked them less each time he did. There was a group
of engine sheds and cargo halls through which sidings ran, all of them bombed-out, and then a forest of rubble and
exploded fuel tanks leading down to the vast main gate, the white stone of its great mouth scorched black. Beyond the
rear extremity of the railyard’s eastern border rose the burned-out smelteries. A regiment of Vervun Primary troops
— called the Spoilers, Corbec had been told — held that position and watched the approach up the treacherous slagmountain.
Corbec had around two hundred Ghosts dug in through the engine sheds and the rubble beyond, with
forward scout teams at the leading edge towards the gate.
Colonel Modile’s Vervun Primary units, almost five thousand strong, manned the main trenches and rubble glacis
in the central sector of the wide railyard. Bulwar’s NorthCol troops, two thousand or more, were positioned along
the west, towards proud and grimy rows of as yet undamaged manufactories. Fifty units of NorthCol armour waited
at the north end of the railhead in access roads and marshalling yards, ready to drive forward in the event of a
breakthrough.
Corbec crossed between fire-blackened, roofless engine sheds, his hefty boots crunching into the thick crust of ash
and rubble that littered the place despite the pioneer teams’ clearance work.
In the shed, twenty Ghosts were standing easy, all except their spotters at blast-holes and windows, looking south.
The roof was bare ribs and tangles of reinforcing metal strands poked from broken rockcrete.
Corbec crossed to where Scout MkVenner and Trooper Mochran squatted on a makeshift firestep of oil drums,
gazing out through holes in the brickwork.
“You’ve a good angle here, boys,” Corbec said, pulling himself up onto the rusty drums and taking a look.
“Good for dying, sir,” MkVenner muttered dryly. He was a scout in the true mould of Scout Sergeant Mkoll, dour
and terse. Mkoll had trained most of them personally. MkVenner was a tall man in his thirties with a blue, half-moon
tattoo under his right eye.
“How’s that, MkVenner?”
MkVenner pointed out at the gates. “We’re square on if they make a frontal, us and the locals in the main yard.”
“And our angles have been cut and blinded since that thing fell in,” Mochran added in a tired voice.
The “thing” he referred to was the gigantic wreck of the spider siege engine which the NorthCol batteries had
brought down during the First Storm three days before. Its massive bulk, slumped across the gatemouth barricades,
half blocked the entrance and had proved impossible to shift, despite the efforts of pioneer teams and sappers with
dozers and heavy lifters.
Corbec saw the trooper was right. Enemy infantry could come worming in around the bulk and be inside before
they were visible. The war machine gave the enemy a bridge right in through the tangled, rusting hulks of the gate
barricade.
Corbec told them something reassuring and light that made them both laugh.
Afterwards, though he tried, he could not recall what it was.
He sauntered southwards, skirting through a trenchline and entered the rubble scarps closer to the gate. He had
eleven heavy weapon teams tied in here at intervals behind flakboards and bagging. Six heavy stubbers on tripod
mounts, two autoguns on bipods with ammo feeders sprawled on their bellies next to the gunners, and three missile
launchers. Between the weapon positions, Tanith troopers were spread in lines along the embrasures. Walking
amongst them, Corbec sensed their vulnerability. There was nothing to their rear and east flank but the ruined
smelteries and the Spoil. They had to trust the abilities of the unseen “Spoilers” to keep them from surprises.
Corbec opened his vox-link and called up three flamer-parties from the reserves behind the engine sheds. Now he
was out here, with dawn upon them, he could see how raw and open the scene was, and he wanted it secured.
He found Larkin in a foxhole close to the gates. The wiry sniper was breaking down his specialised lasgun and
cleaning it.
“Any movement, Larks?”
“Not a fething hint.” Larkin clacked a fresh, reinforced barrel into place and then stroked a film of gun-oil off the
exchanger before sliding one of the hefty charge packs into its slot.
Corbec sat down beside Larkin and took a moment to check his own lasgun. Standard issue, with a skeleton metal
stock, it was shorter and rougher than the sniper’s gun and lacked the polished nalwood grips and shoulder block.
“Gotta get myself one of those one day,” said Corbec lightly, nodding at Larkin’s precious gun.
Larkin snorted and clicked his scope gently into place on the top of the weapon. “They only give sniper-pattern MG’s
to men who can shoot. You wouldn’t know how to use it.”
Corbec had a retort ready to go when his vox-link chirped.
“Modile to all sections. Observers on the Curtain Wall have detected movement in the rain. Could be nothing, but
go to standby.”
Corbec acknowledged. He looked up at the huge wall and the towering top of the gatehouse. He often forgot that
they had men and positions up there, thousands of them, a hundred metres up, blessed with oversight and a
commanding position of fire.
He nodded across at Larkin, who slid the long flash-suppresser onto his muzzle with a hollow clack.
“Ready?”
“Never. But that’s usual. Bring ’em on. I’m tired of waiting.”
“That’s the spirit,” Corbec said.
That was what his mouth said, anyway. The sound was utterly stolen by a marrow-pulping impact of shells and
las-fire that bracketed the gatehouse and shook the wall. Billows of flame belched in over the ruined death machine
and the barricade and swirled up above the railyard. Parts of the barricade, sections of rolling stock, fifty tonnes
apiece, shredded and blew inwards.
Corbec dropped. Billions of zinging shards of shrapnel, many white-hot, whickered down over the Tanith lines.
Already, he could hear urgent calls over his link for medics coming from the Vervun Primary positions in the centre
of the yard. He swung round and saw shells falling in the Spoil behind the Tanith position, blowing up fierce spumes
of rock-waste. The Second Storm had started.
Ferrozoica changed tactics for its second assault. The First Storm had been an all-out, comprehensive attack along
the southern Curtain Wall. This time they began a sustained bombardment of the wall length to keep Vervunhive
reeling and they focussed their invasion to three point-assaults. One, an armoured formation led by two of the
fearsome “flat-crabs,” hit Sondar Gate and pummelled at it for over two hours before being driven back by the wallguns.
Another slid west along the eastern rail-lines and struck at Croe Gate and the railhead behind it with battalionstrength
force. The fighting in that sector, fronted by Vervun Primary and Roane Deeper regiments, lasted until the
early afternoon.
The third attack went straight in for the vulnerable Veyveyr Gate.
In the first ten minutes of the Second Storm, flat-crabs and other heavy artillery siege-crackers brought down the
barricade and blasted apart the corpse of the spider. The first flat-crab rolled right in through the gate, squashing
metal and splintering rubble, driving down into the Vervun Primary positions in the main yard. Further artillery
obliterated all defences along the bastions of the gateway and the walls nearby, and Veyveyr found itself shorn of its
precious raised gunnery positions.
There were a few, desperate minutes of confusion as Colonel Modile tried to rally his splintered ground forces in
the main area of the yard. They were falling back in droves before the armour attack, stampeding down the
trenchways to escape the insurmountable power of the Zoican death machine. A second flat-crab began to grind in
behind the first, searing shells to the right into the Tanith positions.
Modile fabricated a clumsy counter-assault and withdrew his infantry in a V-shape, allowing the NorthCol armour
to press forward to meet the siege engines. The railhead air was full of clanking tracks and whinnying shells as the
formations moved in. NorthCol tanks were blown apart by the heavy dorsal cannons of the flat-crabs, and other tanks
and Chimeras were crushed flat under the siege engine’s tracks.
All the infantry, Ghosts included, could do little but cower in the face of this monumental clash. The noise level
was physically painful and the ground trembled.
There was a vast detonation and a cheer went up all along the infantry lines. Sustained fire from three dozen
NorthCol tanks had finally crippled the first flat-crab and blown it apart. The second, grinding through the gate, was
blocked by the wreck.
Corbec scurried round in his cover and started to break towards the flank of the second crab.
Larkin caught him by the arm.
“What the feth are you doing, Colm?”
“We have to hit that thing! Maybe a man on foot can get close enough to st—”
A close shell blast threw them into the ash-cover.
“You’re mad!” cried Larkin, getting up. He found the brim of the defence and trained his gun out.
“Let the fething armour worry about the crabs! Here’s our problem!”
Corbec crawled up alongside him.
Zoican infantry, hundreds of them, were charging through the breach the flat-crabs had gouged, pouring through
Veyveyr Gate itself.
Corbec began to fire. The thin crack of his lasgun was quickly joined by the heavier whine of Larkin’s sniper
weapon. The support weapons along the Tanith lines opened up behind them.
Missiles from the heavy weapon positions hissed above his head as Brin Milo bellied forward through the rubble
and began to scope for enemy infantry. Colonel Corbec’s hasty orders were crackling over the vox-link. Hell was
erupting around them.
Milo saw a few ochre shapes clambering across the dead zone in the gate mouth and took aim. His first shot went
wide, but he adjusted and dropped a Zoican with his second and his third.
Trooper Baffels and Trooper Yarch flung themselves down beside him and started firing too. Las-fire slashed
back and forth across the railyard, flickering in multicoloured, searing lines. Someone a few metres away was
screaming.
Milo tried to shut it out. He aimed his weapon as Larkin had taught him, kept his breathing slow, squeezed. A blurt
of las-fire. An ochre warrior spun off his feet.
Yarch crawled up to the lip of the embrasure and primed a grenade. He tossed it and a crumping vortex of wind
blew grit back onto them.
“If we—” Yarch began.
Milo and Baffels never found out what Yarch was planning. A las-round entered his skull though his nose-bone,
blowing out the back of his head. As he rose weightlessly and jerked back, two more lasrounds hit him, one through
the throat and the other through the eye. He tumbled down the rubble. Another lost man lost.
Baffels, a bearded man in his early forties with a barrel chest and a blue tattoo claw that lined his cheek, pulled
Milo back into cover as tremendous las-fire exploded along their trench top.
Together, they crawled down into the trench bottom and found Fulch, MkFeyd and Dremmond trying to edge round
south.
A light-storm of las-fire drummed around them. A ricochet hit Fulch in the buttock and dropped him to his knees.
MkFeyd tried to rise to the fire step, but las-fire walked along its edge, exploding the fore-grip of his weapon and
taking off the tops of two fingers of his left hand. He fell back, cursing his luck and jetting the others with bright, red
blood.
Milo started to bind MkFeyd’s fingers with strips of field bandage, keeping his head low. Baffels was trying to
patch the oozing wound in Fulch’s hindquarters and was calling for a medic over his vox-link.
Dremmond, who was bringing one of the flamers Corbec had requested forward, crawled up to the lip and sent
withering blasts of incendiary death over the top. He was already boasting a flamer-tan from the First Storm, in
which he had fought at Hass West.
More troopers battled along to join them. Some, led by Sergeant Fols, went ahead down the zag in the trench line
to create an enfilade.
Milo looked up from his work with MkFeyd’s hand, his face smeared and dripping with blood, as a trooper
nearby was cut in two. Dremmond kept firing with his flamer and three more Ghosts joined him at the firestep,
opening up with their lasguns.
“Best I can do!” Milo said to the injured man, then crawled up to take his place at the firestep too. MkFeyd was
working on pure adrenaline now and he crawled up alongside the boy. He managed to brace his gun with his
bandaged hand and began firing. The line of Ghost lasguns barked and flashed down the length of the eastern
position.
MkVenner moved his team out of the engine shed just as shelling from the second flat-crab blew it out. Mochran was
already dead, punctured apart by a series of stub-rounds that had perforated the shed wall.
MkVenner had ordered his unit to fix bayonets — the long silver daggers of the Tanith — at some point early in the
assault, and now he was glad of it. Zoican infantry, their faces hidden by those sculpted ochre masks, were pouring
into the Tanith trench lines from the south. With no more than fifteen men around him, MkVenner engaged them,
stabbing and slicing, firing weapons point-blank. The Zoicans were overrunning them. There seemed no end to the
numbers of ochre enemy.
As fast as MkVenner could kill them, there were more. It was like fighting the ocean tide.
Major Racine, of the Vervun Primary, had been out inspecting the forward arrays of his Veyveyr positions when the
storm came down. He had tried to control the retreat and he debated fiercely with Colonel Modile about how best to
counter the Zoican push. After a few bitter returns over the vox-line, it had gone dead. Modile clearly didn’t want to
argue with his subaltern anymore.
Racine had five hundred men behind a glacis of rubble in the main yard, facing the encroachment of the second
flat-crab. He called up his bombardier and took three satchels full of mine charges and grenades.
Then he hauled himself over the lip and ran towards the siege engine.
A raging storm of las — and bolt-rounds whipped around him. Not one touched him. All that saw it regarded it as
a miracle. Racine was ten metres from the vast supertank, with its grinding segmented armour, when a las-round
went through his ear into his brain and killed him. He dropped.
There was a dreadful hiss of wronged valour and injustice from his watching troops. He had got so close.
The flat-crab ground forward, crushing Racine’s corpse into the ash.
The pressure set off the charges looped around him.
The vast cannonade of explosions flipped the crab up and over on its rear end. Quick-thinking gunners in the
NorthCol armour hit its exposed belly hard. One shell touched off its magazine and it vaporised in a colossal jet of
fire that blew out the top of Veyveyr Gate itself.
The Vervun Primary troops, wilting and shattered in the aftershock, swore that Racine would be remembered.
The Zoican troops were all over them. Corbec edged down a gully that had once been a side street in the railyard,
the walls still standing, scarred and crater-peppered, around him. He had sixteen men with him, including Larkin and
Trooper Genx, who carried a bipod autocannon.
Corbec’s first thought was to order his men to hug the walls, but the streets seemed to funnel and corral the enemy
fire, and las — and bolt-rounds ricocheted along them. He’d already lost three men who had kept to the walls and
been blown down by the fire sliding down them. It was safer to stand out in the middle of the street.
They pushed ahead and met a detachment of Zoican storm troops, at least fifty of them, pouring into the eastern
positions. Fire walloped back at them and Corbec marvelled at the way the lasrounds kissed and followed the stone
walls. Trooper Fanck dropped, his chest gone. Trooper Manik was hit in the groin and his screams echoed around
them.
Genx opened fire and his heavy cannon made a distinctive “whuk-whuk-whuk” in the closed space. An enemy
round took off his hand at the wrist and Corbec scooped up the autocannon and fired it himself. Genx, his stump
instantly cauterised by the las-fire, got up without comment and began to feed his colonel’s weapon.
Larkin took his targets as they came, blowing off heads or blowing out chests with the powerful kick of his sniper
gun. The las-fire of the normal weapons was superhot but lacked stopping power.
Larkin blanched as men beside him hit enemy troops who kept going despite precise hits which had passed
through them cleanly. Only Larkin’s sniper gun and Corbec’s autocannon were actually dropping the foe first time so
they wouldn’t get up again.
The NorthCol were almost overrun. Colonel Bulwar called to Colonel Modine, but the Vervun Primary officer had
apparently shut his vox link down.
“Anvil!” Bulwar signalled to Corbec, the only officer in this hell-fight he trusted. “Anvil!”
Morning itself was rising above it all, unnoticed. At Sondar Gate, after more than two hours of intense fighting, the
Zoican attack was driven off. Grizmund’s Narmenian tanks had assembled in the Square of Marshals just inside the
gate ready to face any force that broke in. They stood in rumbling lines just like Vegolain’s had done in the first hours
of the war, over a month before.
When the push at Sondar was repulsed, House Command signalled Grizmund to pull out and deploy along the
southern manufactory highway to reinforce Veyveyr Gate. Two regiments of Vervun Primary Mechanised and a
Volpone battlegroup were also directed to support Veyveyr, but the orders, handed down by Vice Marshal Anko,
were imprecise and the reinforcement elements became throttled in queues on the arterial routes. Grizmund,
frustrated and unable to get clear direction from House Command, moved his armour column off the highway and
tried to approach Veyveyr via stock yards behind the manufactories. Proper authorisation for this was impossible as
the vox-links were jammed with chatter from the chaos at the railhead. Grizmund had gone about two kilometres,
forcing his tanks through chainlink fences and razorwire barricades, when VPHC units bellowing curses and orders
through loudhailers headed them off and demanded they return to the highway.
The confrontation grew ugly. Grizmund himself descended from his tank and approached the VPHC troops
directly, arguing that his unorthodox route was necessary. Tempers flew and when one of the VPHC commissars
drew a pistol, Grizmund knocked him down. There was a brief brawl and the astonished Grizmund found himself
and four of his senior commanders arrested at gunpoint. The VPHC dragged them off to House Command, leaving the
Narmenian tank force leaderless and stymied, under the close watch of a growing force of VPHC.
The lack of concerted direction from House Command caused other disasters that made a bad day worse. The
Vervun Primary and Volpone reinforcements were stalled all along the southern access. One group of Vervun motortroops
riding half-tracks with Hydra batteries mounted on the flatbeds were trapped in a side transit rout. In their
agitation, they mistook a unit of Volpone Chimeras advancing behind them for an enemy force. By that stage, with
nothing coming over the vox-links but undisciplined terror and panic from Veyveyr Gate, there was a general
impression that the Zoicans had forced entry into the Hive and were sacking the southern quarters. The Hydra
batteries opened fire, briefly, until the mistake was discovered. By then, thirteen Volpone troops were dead.
The Second Storm was showing up a great weakness in the Vervunhive command structure. Vervun Primary,
House Command and the VHPC had communication protocols and designated channels which worked efficiently
during peace time or practice drills, but which were incapable of handling the sudden spikes in vox-traffic that
accompanied heavy fighting. Worse still, the House Command vox-system, modelled on Imperial standard, used the
same channel bands as the Imperial Guard and the NorthCol. Within an hour of the assault starting, it was virtually
impossible for any unit commander to talk long range to his troops or for any order signals from House Command to
reach the ground. It was even impossible to vox House Command for clarification. Only short-range vox-links
between troops and officers in the field ground were still functioning. Some commanders tried to switch channels,
hoping their men would have the same idea, but there was little chance of officers and men guessing the same new
channel simultaneously.
At Croe Gate, General Nash had a measure of success. He switched to a wideband his Roane Deepers had
famously been forced to use once on Kroxis and his vox-staffers on the ground had the same idea. For most of the
day, Nash was the only senior commander in the field to have a direct open link to his forces.
A Volpone force under Corday also managed to resume contact with its distant elements. Corday adroitly used his
short-range micro-beads to relay the new channel setting from man to man through the field. Unfortunately, he had
chosen a channel that was crippled by interference from the Shield harmonics.
At Veyveyr, matters were made worse by the fact that Modile had shut down the main channel to cut off the
demands of his officers — men like the late Racine — who were now questioning Modile’s orders. Corbec received
Bulwar’s “Anvil” code over the short-range and was able to coordinate his resistance with the NorthCol
commander, but they found their forces conflicting with Vervun Primary troops following Modile’s increasingly
knee-jerk commands.
Gaunt, who had been at Hass West when the storm began, immediately headed for Veyveyr with Daur and a
platoon of Tanith. Their troop-truck convoy found the back end of the reinforcement columns jammed fast and they
struggled to find a way around or through. Gaunt tried Raglon’s vox-set frantically to get House Command to rectify
the growing logistical disaster, but he found the lines as jammed as the other commanders had before him.
He handed the speaker horn back to Raglon and looked down at the pale-faced Daur. The rumble and roar of the
nightmarish Veyveyr battle backlit the buildings and habs ahead of them.
“How far to Veyveyr from here?” Gaunt snapped.
“Four, maybe five kilometres,” replied the Vervun Primary liaison.
Gaunt eyed the solid wall of troops and troop carriers choking the highway ahead and cursed quietly. Establishing
proper and workable vox-protocols would be his priority once this day was done. The Vervun Primary were brave
men and the noble houses were honourable institutions, but in war they were rank amateurs.
“Dismount!” Gaunt yelled back down his force and leaped out of the lead truck. Daur joined him, prepping the
lasrifle he had drawn from stores after the First Storm. His arm still hurt and wasn’t mended, but it worked well
enough for him to carry a weapon and he’d be damned if he was going to follow the commissar into action again and
have to ask to borrow a gun. He gulped down a couple of painkiller tablets to soothe the ache.
The fifty Tanith Ghosts had assembled on the road beside the trucks.
Gaunt walked down the rank, speaking directly and briefly. “We’re advancing on foot. It’s five or so kilometres
and we need to move fast, so ditch any extra weight — just carry weapons and ammunition, bayonets. Get rid of
anything that’ll slow you down or wear you out by the time we get there. Daur will lead.”
He looked round at Daur. “Captain? Find a way.”
Daur nodded, confidently. Though a hiver born and bred, he knew the vast complexities of the southern
manufactory district no better than the off-worlders. He pulled a chart-plate out of a thigh-pouch and deftly cycled
through the map-patterns until he found the area they were in.
With a stylus, he worked out a possible route. He was determined not to fail the Ghosts — and, more particularly,
Gaunt.
“Follow me,” he said and headed off the road at a trot, pushing through a flak-board fence and into the service
yard of a machinesmithy.
Gaunt and the Ghosts hurried after him.
At Croe Gate, the Zoican push was hitting the adamantine gates so hard and so frequently that they were denting and
starting to glow with heat. Nash brought what mechanised forces he had into place inside the gates, in case they fell.
Outside, a line of enemy tanks and armoured fighting vehicles perhaps five hundred strong, stretched out down the
cuttings of the rail tracks and the rockcrete supports of the elevated express line. Some Zoican infantry strengths
were visible too, but so far it was entirely a war of cannon, rocket, mortar and wall-gun against tank and artillery. If
the Vervunhive forces could only keep them out and keep the mighty gates sealed tight, the battle might never descend
to the level of infantry mayhem that was occurring at Veyveyr.
If two such infantry fronts opened — if Croe Gate broke — Nash knew it could signal the start of an inexorable
defeat for Vervunhive. He prayed to the holy Emperor of Terra that the Zoicans had no more death machines left to
unleash.
Veyveyr was truly a nightmare. The air across the vast yard was thick with las-fire and tracers, gouts from flamers,
whooping rockets and dense palls of smoke. Despite the volatile highlights of his combat career, Corbec had seldom
seen anything so fierce or intense. Ducking into cover and trying to clear a feed-jam in the autocannon with Genx
crouched next to him, Corbec wondered if it was because the fight was so enclosed: the Curtain Wall on one side,
the manufactories around, the Shield above. It was as if this hellish firefight was being conducted in a box that
concentrated the fury and amplified the noise.
Bulwar signalled him again and Corbec had to strain to hear. The NorthCol Commander was driving forward in a
wedge from the west, bringing his armour in as well as his ground troops and several units of Vervun Primary that he
had been able to pry away from the useless Modile. He wanted Corbec to support with his Ghosts from the east.
Corbec acknowledged. He sent the word down, from man to man, trying to unify them into a coordinated effort.
But the Zoicans were everywhere and Corbec knew at least three parts of his force were bottled in behind him and
fighting for their lives.
He took a look eastwards at the dank slopes of the Spoil. Enemy shelling still whooshed down into it and he could
see the sparks of las-fire exchanged up and down the ore-slag. The Spoilers were engaging hostiles coming up the
Spoil. He hoped the Zoicans would continue their push up at the well-defended Spoilers. If they turned west, they
would flow in on his meagre force from the rear and—
He shut off the thought.
“How much?” he shouted at Genx.
With his one good hand, Genx indicated they had about three thousand rounds left for the autocannon, in loops
around his body or in the panniers of ammo-drums he had collected. About two minutes’ sustained fire, Corbec
thought.
He voxed his men to present and move west. They rose, then immediately ducked back as a heavy rake of las-fire
swept in from the northwest.
Corbec screamed a curse. The fething Vervun Primary, effectively leaderless and alone in the mid-yard, were
firing at anything that moved and had flanked the Ghosts as well as if they’d planned it.
Corbec tried to raise Modile on the vox. All he got was Modile’s adjutant screaming obscenities down the link,
demanding that the NorthCol and the Tanith regroup as per battle orders.
Modile’s dead. Gonna kill him myself, Corbec decided.
He rose and set the autocannon chugging a blurt of fire down the rubble line at Zoican movement.
A bolt-round slammed into the stone beside him and glanced off, hitting him in the thigh.
Corbec tumbled down with the impact and tried to claw the smouldering shell-case fragments out of his tunic
pants. The cloth was punctured and there was blood. He found the round had been spent on impact with the stone and
just the case had spun off into him, peppering his leg with dozens of metal scraps. He flexed the limb. It hurt and was
bleeding freely, but he could use it.
Modile was definitely going to die.
There was no going west, not directly. He pulled his units after him and headed towards the gate under cover of
the eastern trenches and barricades. They might be able to break west further down, beyond the range of the hopeless
Vervun Primary.
Shells roared overhead and there were a great many more rockets banging in through the gate mouth now.
Corbec’s force had gone a hundred metres when they met a battlegroup of Zoican shock troops head on.
Milo reached the end of a shattered stretch of wall and tossed a grenade around the corner. As soon as the blast
thumped out, vibrating his chest and spilling brick dust and plaster from the wall-section, he raced across the gap
and took up station at the next las-chewed corner, kneeling, sweeping his lasgun around in the grenade smoke to
cover Baffels, who crossed behind him.
A few enemy shots rang over their heads, higher than the wall, cracking the air.
Neskon and Rhys came up after, darting across the gap as Baffels and Milo fired cover.
“Where’s Dremmond?” shouted Neskon over the roar. He was plastered in blood, but it wasn’t his own.
“Ahead, I think!” yelled Milo. He tried his micro-bead link, but it just ground out static.
The platoon had been advancing down the ditchlines between the buildings towards the gate, in support of Colonel
Corbec’s brave push and for a while Dremmond’s flamer had been clearing the way. But a trio of rockets had
slammed into the ditch and broken the advance, and now the forward section of the platoon format, with Dremmond
and Sergeant Fols in it, had advanced out of sight in the smoke.
Milo, Baffels and Rhys pushed on down the side of the next bombed-out storeblock as Neskon covered the gap for
the next group of Ghosts: Domor, Filain and Tokar, followed by the vox-officer, Wheln, and Troopers Caill and
Venar. Neskon and Domor then advanced, leaving Filain and Tokar to cover the overlap for the three following.
At the front of the group, Milo, Baffels and Rhys pushed forward again, grenading a break in the wall and
sprinting across it to lay cover for the parties behind.
There was ferocious fighting from a hundred metres ahead. Milo’s micro-bead squawked and he heard flashes of
Corbec’s commanding voice.
Domor and Neskon moved up to them and Domor probed the smoke cover ahead with the optic implants he had
acquired after an injury on Menazoid Epsilon.
The focus rings hummed and whirred around the blank lenses. “I read heat — lots of it. A flamer, pouring it on.”
Milo nodded. He could smell prometheum.
“Dremmond,” Baffels suggested.
Encouraged that they might be closing on their forward element, the platoon rallied and pushed forward. Milo
realised that they seemed to be following him, looking to him for leadership, with Sergeant Fols absent. It was mad
— they all had more combat experience than him, and all were older.
It was as if the gloss of Gaunt was on him, as if he represented some kind of natural authority simply by
association with the commissar.
The cover ahead broke into a series of low-dug ditches punctuated with shell-craters. Enemy fire was sheeting
across it, making it impassable. Milo saw at least two dead Ghosts twisted and broken in the ditch-line.
“Round! We go round!” he urged and Baffels nodded. The men liked Baffels too, and he seemed to be readily
adopting the role of second to Milo’s lead, like Corbec to Gaunt. Milo marvelled at the way structures simply
evolved organically in combat, without question or spoken decision. With focus, fear and adrenaline that high, right
on the tightrope of life and death, men made simple, natural decisions.
Or a well-trained, motivated unit like the Ghosts did at any rate. Milo was sure the Vervun Primary troops were
collapsing simply because they lacked that resolve and that organic spontaneity.
He took his fellows left, towards the edge of the Spoil, through a series of drumlike scrap stores where greasy rail
bogeys and axle blocks were stacked. Venar had an autocannon and several cans of ammo still strapped to his loadbearing
harness, so Milo gave him point to clear the way. The rattle of short cannon bursts echoed through the stores
as Venar picked the way ahead clean.
The stores opened out into a hectare or so of stockyard that was miraculously unscathed. Flatbed wagons and
pipe-trucks sat in linked trains along six parallel sidings. There was a burned-out diesel locomotive at one bufferend.
The platoon edged forward, through and around the dormant wagons, sometimes sliding under or between trucks,
or clambering over hook assemblies thick with sooty oil.
Las-shots began to hammer into the wagons near Milo. They blew out sections on the wooden sideboarding, and
Baffels and Milo were showered with splinters.
The men dropped into cover, spread out through the wagon yard. Curt assessments as to the angle and position of
the shooters flicked back and forth through the micro-bead link. Venar fired a few bursts of cannon under the wagon
he was sheltering behind, and Milo heard shots ping and ricochet off the ironwork of the bogeys.
The enemy fire increased.
Milo moved them forward. He saw Filain scoot out from between wagons and then duck back into cover as lasfire
scooped up the gravel and stone around him. One shot severed a piece of track and the metal section broke with
an almost musical chime.
Domor and Neskon also tried to move forward. They skirted back a few trucks and came out around a high-sided
freight wagon. Las-shots spanged off the thin metal sides of the wagon. Neskon dropped, but Domor dragged him up
and they fell into cover along the next truck line. Neskon wasn’t hit. He had simply stumbled.
Milo and Baffels, with Rhys and Tokar just behind them, were pinned. Milo tried to creep around the end of the
nearest wagon, but more firing erupted and he hit the ground, winded.
“You’re hit!” he heard Baffels call.
“No, I’m fine—” Milo said.
“You’re fething hit!” Baffels repeated.
Milo reached around and felt a wet hole in the left shoulder of his tunic. It was sore, but there was no real pain.
He had been hit. He hadn’t even felt it.
Milo got to his feet and then paused, lowering himself again and carefully looking out under the wagons. When he
had dropped, he’d glimpsed something that his mind was only just identifying.
Three trains away, under the trucks, he could see feet. Armoured, heavy booted feet in distinctive ochre armour.
He waved the others down to look.
A dozen, maybe more.
Zoicans.
The punishing fire that had pinned them slowed. The Zoicans were evidently moving too, pushing in and around
the trucks just as the Ghosts were, but from the other side.
Milo counted off the men and sent them wide, using the concealment of the trucks. Few in the Imperial Guard
moved as stealthily as the Tanith.
There was a burst of cannon fire twenty metres south of Milo. Then two more, a few answering las-shots. Venar
had engaged.
More firing, brief and fierce, came from the next lane of wagons. Over the link, he heard Wheln curse, then laugh.
Baffels crawled ahead of Milo, down the length of a flatbed wagon. The Ghosts were all grey with gravel dust
now, and their hands and knees were thick with oil.
Milo heard a dull sound from the body of the truck.
He yelled a warning and swung upwards as the Zoican storm-trooper appeared over the lip of the wagonbed and
fired down. Baffels had rolled instinctively in under the side of the truck and slammed against the wheels and the
sleepers as the Zoican’s fire exploded the grit where he had been crawling.
Milo fired a burst upwards, punching three las-rounds through the aluminium siding of the wagon and the Zoican
behind. The ochre-armoured figure convulsed and toppled clumsily out of the wagon. He landed next to the cowering
Baffels, who automatically turned and shot the corpse through the head, point-blank.
Neskon, Rhys and Tokar were firing out between wagons, scoping for Zoicans just the other side of the track.
Zoican las-fire and hard rounds came back between and under the wagons and forced Tokar to scramble on his arse
back behind a slumped fuel drum. Neskon used the heavy bogey assembly of a wagon as cover and shuddered as
persistent fire whipped under the cart-body and slammed into the huge iron wheels against his back.
Rhys rose, a las-round just missing his head, and lobbed a grenade over the wagon so that it fell neatly on the
Zoican side of the rolling stock and vaporised them. A cracked Zoican helmet, split across the sneering, emotionless
sculpture of the face, tumbled through the air and bounced near to his feet. He thought about taking it as a trophy until
he realised there was the best part of a head left in it.
Milo heard Wheln cry out. The man was down. He could hear him moaning just a few paces away on the other
side of the wagon.
“My leg… my leg…”
“Shut up!” Milo yelled, then dove over the hook-lock between wagons to roll clear on the other side of the track.
Wheln was sprawled in the open between siding tracks, his left leg below the knee a ruin of blood, bone and tattered
cloth.
Milo ran low to him, grabbed him under the arms and began to drag him into cover. Shots stitched the gravel
around them. Two Zoicans appeared on the top of the next wagon over and another two edged out from between
trucks. A las-shot cracked past Milo’s nose, and then two more ripped through the loose folds of his camo-cape.
There was a bark of cannon fire, and the two Zoicans on the truck top came apart and fell. The others dropped
back into cover. Milo got Wheln into the shelter of the back end of the wagon, pulling him in between the tracks.
There was a group of Zoicans at the other end of the same truck, firing around it. Some fired under, but the shots
were deflected by the axles. Milo looked frantically to each side for help. He saw Baffels in position behind a cart
on the adjacent train, the one Milo had just scrambled from to reach Wheln. Baffels was too pinned with fire to make
a shot.
Milo looked up, trying to ignore Wheln’s moaning, and studied the hook-damp that linked the wagon they were
using as cover to the one behind them. It took him a few moments to figure out how to disengage it, his hands slipping
on the greased iron.
When it was free, Milo hooked a grenade over a brake cable and pulled the pin. Then he yanked Wheln out from
behind the truck and they fell down a slope the other side, Wheln shrieking with pain.
The grenade detonated and the force cannoned the freed truck, all eighteen tonnes of it, down the trackway,
crushing the Zoicans sheltering at the far end between it and the next wagon on the rail. The entire length of rolling
stock slammed and rattled into itself.
Rhys, Neskon and Baffels crossed over to cover Milo as the boy struggled to tie off Wheln’s ruined limb and stop
him bleeding out.
Wheln wouldn’t stop screaming. Milo wanted to call for a medic, but he knew the vox-lines were useless and
besides, Wheln had smashed the vox-caster when he fell. That was even supposing there was a medic anywhere
near.
Baffels led Venar and the others and proceeded to clear the rest of the yard. A few brief exchanges with retreating
Zoicans left more ochre bodies lying on or between the rails.
Milo could hear something else now, over the shooting and Wheln’s shrieking and the constant thunder of the main
battle.
Voices. Chanting voices, low and slick and evil.
The ammo-can clacked dry and the autocannon was useless. Corbec threw it aside and pulled his lasrifle off his
shoulder, opening up again. His unit was right at the gate now, embroiled in an entirely structureless fight with the
main force of the Zoican shock-troops. The fight blasted through the ruined outbuildings of the gatehouse complex
and across the rubble-thick ground in the gatemouth itself.
There were Zoicans everywhere.
Corbec had ceased to be a commander. There was nothing to command. He was simply a man fighting with every
iota of strength and stamina left in him. He fought to stay alive and to kill the ochre shapes that drove at him from all
sides.
It was the same for all the Ghosts in that engagement. The only thing that slowed the tide of Zoican invasion was
the width of the blasted gate. In an open field, the forty or so Ghosts with Corbec would have been overrun long
since.
Corbec was bleeding from a dozen light wounds. Those enemies he didn’t kill outright with las-fire he demolished
with blows from his rifle-stock and stabs of his bayonet.
Dremmond was suddenly alongside him, swathing the enemy in a wide cone of flames. The flamer pack on his
back stuttered. Corbec knew that sound. The tanks were almost dry.
He yelled at Dremmond to wash the gates. What little flame they had left could best be used burning the entrance
out. Dremmond swung around, his spurting fire twisting like a whip. A dozen Zoicans crumpled, armour burning and
melting off them. Some became torches that stumbled a few paces before they fell.
Dremmond bought Corbec a moment to think.
Corbec crossed, firing still, towards the wound-peppered wall of an outbuilding, glad he had jammed all the
energy clips he could find into his jacket pockets that dawn.
Genx was in cover by the wall. By now the pain was beginning to trickle through and Genx was pale with trauma.
Without his hand, he couldn’t handle a lasrifle, although there were several fallen nearby, dropped by dead Zoicans
and Tanith alike.
Corbec handed Genx his laspistol and the lad — Genx was no more than twenty, though built like a ox — began to
crack away at any target in sight.
Supported by a trio of men, Sergeant Fols covered the entrance to a stairwell in the gatehouse, its roof blown off
by the advance of the first flat-crab earlier. The blackened corpses of Vervun Primary gunners from the upper
ramparts lay all around, amid the twisted wreckage of their fallen guns and piles of ceramite chunks.
Fols looked up at the mighty gate that they fought to protect. It was almost painful to see it with the top blown
away, just two great gate towers adjoining the splintered Curtain Wall. The fort on top had fallen in and its debris
made up the ground they fought over.
Fols also noticed how the Shield above them was rough-edged and intermittent. The death of the flat-crab which
had blown out the arch of the massive gate had also taken down a relay station, and the Shield canopy was fraying
and sparking out over them.
Fols felt wet and realised it was rain. The torrential downpour outside was still hammering and now, with the
Shield ripped back for a hundred metres or so, it was falling on them too.
The ground was turning to mush as the rain made gluey soup out of the ankle-deep ash.
The Ghost next to Fols dropped wordlessly, his jaw vaporised. Streams of rain ran down them all, colouring with
blood and dirt.
Fols rounded his two remaining men into the staircase, firing across the gate. The rain and smoke was killing
visibility.
Fols saw the bright blurt of Dremmond’s flamer a little way off, saw how the rain made steam off the white-hot
blasts and heated stones.
The man next to him yelled something and Fols realised there were Zoican shock troops spilling over the side
walls behind them by the dozen.
He turned, killed three. A welter of las-shots cut his men apart and splashed the wall they had just been using for
cover with their blood. Fols lost a knee, an eye, an elbow and a fourth shot tore through his belly.
He was still firing when a Zoican bayonet impaled him to the wall.
The chanting continued. The Zoican shock forces were pushing through Veyveyr Gate holding banner-poles aloft, the
whipping flags marked with the symbol of Ferrozoica and with other emblems that stung the eyes and nauseated the
gut: the runes and badges of the Chaos pestilence that had overwhelmed them.
Some of the Zoicans had loudhailers wired and bolted to their helmet fronts and were broadcasting abominable
hymns of filth and whining prayers of destruction.
From his position, Corbec knew the Zoicans believed their victory was assured.
He wished he could deny it, but with the pitiful numbers left to him, he didn’t stand a chance.
He changed clips again, throwing the dead one away into the rubble. Next to him, Genx and two other troopers
reloaded.
They would kill as many as they could. In the name of the Emperor, there was no more they could do.
Data-pulses told him the fighting was intense, bestial. But it was so very far away. It came to him only as unemphatic
bursts of information, unemotional cascades of facts.
Salvador Sondar drifted in his Iron Tank. He was becoming increasingly disinterested in the trials of the hive
soldiers. What was happening at Croe Gate and, more vitally, at Veyveyr was an inconsequential dream to him.
All that really mattered now to the High Master of Vervunhive was the chatter.
A rocket cremated Trooper Feax and threw Larkin into the air. He came down hard amid the rubble and the bodies,
ears dead, vision swimming and his beloved rifle nowhere in sight.
He clambered up. He had been with Corbec’s unit at the gate. That was the last thing he remembered.
His hearing began to return. He heard the wretched chanting of the Zoican advance as from underwater. He saw
the las-fire and banner poles as dancing bright colours in the smoke.
A Zoican was right on top of him, glaring down out of that fearsome mask-visor, stabbing with his bayonet.
Larkin lurched aside and fell off a length of wall, two metres down to a bed of debris below. Ignoring his
spasming back, he yanked out his silver Tanith knife and leapt at the Zoican the moment he reappeared over the gullylip.
The Zoican bayonet cut through Larkin’s sleeve. He slammed the brute back over into the rubble and pushed his
blade in, trying to find a space between the ochre armour plating.
It went in, just below the neck seal of the battle-suit. Foul-smelling blood began to spurt out over Larkin’s arm and
hand, and it stung like acid.
The Zoican thrashed and spasmed. Larkin fought back, clawing, kicking and wrenching on his blade’s grip.
He and the Zoican rolled twenty metres down the rubble slope. At the foot, Larkin’s frantic efforts ripped the
Zoican’s helmet off.
He was the first person in Vervunhive to see the face of the enemy, square on, naked, shorn of armour or mask or
visor.
Larkin screamed.
And then stabbed and stabbed and stabbed.
A torrent of las-fire cut across the gate from the west. Zoicans crumpled, falling on their banner poles, loudspeakers
exploding as they died. Corbec and his men, amazed, pushed around to support, hammering into the halted storm
force with renewed vigour.
Nine platoons of Vervun Primary troops funnelled in across the open gate from the west with Commissar Kowle at
the head.
Kowle had headed for Veyveyr Gate from House Command the moment the action began at dawn and it had taken
him until now — almost noon — to reach the front. Unable to reach Modile or any Vervun command group, he had
grabbed Vervun troops by force of authority and personality alone and led them towards the gate flanked by
Bulwar’s men and armour.
Kowle was singing an Imperial hymn at the top of his lungs and firing with a storm bolter.
Bulwar’s NorthCol units pressed in behind, and Bulwar had the sense to spread them east to reinforce the failing
Tanith line.
Corbec couldn’t believe his eyes. At last, a co-ordinated effort. He rallied his remaining men and scoured the
eastern flank of the gate for signs of Zoicans. His support helped Kowle reach the gate itself, a gate that had been
held by the Tanith alone for more than an hour.
The three prongs — Tanith, Vervun and NorthCol — pushed the Zoicans back out into the outer habs and the
torrential rain. Kowle moved his units aside to allow Bulwar’s armour to finish the job and block the gate, though
not before the commissar had posed for propaganda shots that were quickly relayed across the entire public-address
system of the hive: Kowle, victorious in the blasted mouth of Veyveyr; Kowle, blasting at the enemy; Kowle, holding
the Vervun banner aloft on a heap of rubble as Vervun Primary troops mobbed to help him plant the flag-spike in the
ground.
By early afternoon, the gate was held fast by fifty tanks of the NorthCol armoured. Kowle was once more the
People’s Hero. The battle for Veyveyr Gate was over.
At Croe Gate, as news of the overturn reached the Zoican elements, the fighting diminished. Nash sighed in relief
as the enemy withdrew from the smouldering gate-hatches. He ordered the wall guns to punish them anyway.
None of the victorious public-address messages mentioned the losses: 440 Vervun Primary and 200 Roane Deepers
at Croe Gate, 500 Vervun “Spoilers” along the Spoil, 3,500 Vervun Primary, 900 NorthCol and almost a hundred
Tanith at Veyveyr. They had a victory and a hero, and that was all that mattered.
Gaunt and his small reinforcement group reached Veyveyr just as the battle was ending. Gaunt was hot with anger
and determination.
Daur led him down a trench to the Vervun Primary Command post where Colonel Modile was rallying men and
directing vox-links.
Modile looked around as Gaunt strode into the culvert shelter, stony-faced.
“The battle is over. We have won. Vervunhive is victorious,” Modile said blankly into Gaunt’s face.
“I’ve been listening to the vox. I know what occurred here. You balked, Modile. You lost control. You hid. You
shut down the vox-channels when you didn’t like what you heard.”
Modile shrugged vacuously at Gaunt. “But we won…”
The Tanith troops stepped into the command post around Gaunt. Even Daur, grim-faced, had a weapon drawn.
“Round up all the officers and detain them. I want a transcript of all vox-traffic,” Gaunt ordered. The Ghosts
fanned out to do so and the Vervun Primary staffers blinked in confusion as they were jostled around.
“What are you doing?” Modile asked haughtily. “This is my gakking command area!”
“And you’ve commanded what, exactly? A bloodbath. You dismay me, Modile. Men were shrieking for orders and
support, and you ignored them. I heard it all.”
“It was a difficult incident,” Modile said.
“I have a reputation, Modile,” Gaunt said, “a reputation as a fair, honest man who treats his soldiers well and
supports them in the face of darkness. Potentially, that reputation makes me soft. It seems I understand failure and
forgive it.
“Some, like Kowle, believe me to be a weak commissar, not prepared to take the action my rank demands. Not
prepared to enforce field discipline where I see it failing.”
Gaunt removed his cap and handed it to Daur. He stared at Modile, who still wasn’t sure what was going on.
“I am an Imperial commissar. I will enflame the weak, support the wavering, guide the lost. I will be all things to
all men who need me. But I will also punish without hesitation the incompetent, the cowardly and the treasonous.”
“Gaunt, I—” Modile began.
“Commissar Gaunt. Do not speak further. You have cost lives this day.”
Modile backed away, suddenly, horribly realising what was happening.
Gaunt took his bolt pistol from his holster. “For courtesy, choose: a firing squad of your own men or a summary
execution.”
Modile stammered, lost control of his bowels and turned to run.
Gaunt shot him through the head.
“Have it your own way,” he said sadly.
TEN
CASUALTIES
“There came a point, a few years into my career, when I knew I had seen enough. Since then, I have seen a lot
more, but I have Mocked it out. The soul stands only so much.”
—Surgeon Master Goleca, after the Exsanguination of Augustus IX
From the sound of it, there was a hell of a brawl going on at Veyveyr Gate. The sky under the Shield blazed up at
intervals with explosive light, and sound drummed across the hive. It had been going on since daybreak.
The baby, Yoncy, was crying plaintively and making sobbing, sucking noises. It had been doing it all night. Tona
wasn’t sure what to do. Dalin was sullen and quiet, and he slept in the back of the trash-cave most of the time.
Tona crawled forward out of her dugout and looked across the shell-ruined slopes. Below, half a kilometre away,
lay the fenced and razor-wired troop billet of Gavunda Chem Plant Storebarns/Southwest.
That was where the off-world soldiers lived, the pale-skinned, dark-haired ones with their black costumes and
blue tattoos. Tona wondered if they came from a hiveworld too, if the blue tats were gang badges or rank marks.
She dreamed of their food. There was a banquet fit for the Emperor secured down there in the back sheds. She’d
sent Dalin in to scrounge and steal a few times, but it was getting dangerous.
Tona knew it was up to her now. The baby was weak and crying. She needed milk powder and basic nutrient
paste.
There were over a thousand other refugees hiding in the trash slopes and crater-plains in the shell-flattened
manufactories near to her, but she never thought to ask any for help. Everyone in Vervunhive was on their own now.
A particularly fierce airburst cracked the sky above Veyveyr, and Tona turned to look. She’d been to Veyveyr
railhead a few times and had stood in the glass hall of the main station, now long gone, watching the snooty up-Spine
travellers move to and fro from platforms. Her twice-uncle Rika had run a snack-stall there, and she’d also been a
part of a pocket-prey team for a few months.
The Grand Terminus had awed her, even as she worked it. It had seemed to her a doorway to anywhere. If she’d
had the credit, she’d have jumped a train south to the tropical hives, to the archipelago, maybe even to Verghast
Badport where, so they said, it was possible to buy a route to anywhere, including off-world.
Veyveyr Gate had always seemed to her a way off this rock. A possible future. A promise.
Now it was dead and burned out, and callous, off-world soldiers dirtied it with brutal war.
The baby was squalling again. Tona edged out of her bunker and looked back at Dalin. “Stay with her. I’ll be back
soon with food.”
Tona slid down the rubble stacks and moved towards the wire fence of the troop compound.
Tona crossed the ruinscape of the manufactories, industrial areas that had been levelled on that first day before the
Shield lit up. Shattered rockcrete buildings flanked the lips of craters twenty metres across or more. Ruptured metal
sheeting and snapped pipes poked from the brick dust. Unrecognisable pieces of burnt machinery scattered the
ground.
Bodies lay where they had fallen and after a month these were nothing more than loose husks of shrivelled bone
and ragged clothing. The rescue teams had taken away most of the wounded in the initial recovery and habbers had
carried their own dead out. But still bodies remained, crumpled and half-buried in the wide ruin. Carrion-dogs, lean,
diseased and mangy, haunted the rubble, scavenging what they could — like her, she supposed, though unlike the
hounds, she drew the line at feeding off corpses. There was a stagnant, rotten smell to the place and sickness
lingered. Thousands like her, mostly low-caste or the dispossessed from the outer habs, had made this place a
temporary home when the main refuge camps had over-spilled. Tona Criid, like many of Vervunhive’s base-level
citizens, avoided the refuges, for though they offered food and medical rations, they also represented authority and
prejudice. The VPHC controlled most refuges brutally.
She saw others prowling the ruins. Adults mostly, a few children, all thin and dark with filth, their clothes
wretched and ragged. Some stared at her as she passed; some ignored her. None spoke.
She passed a store block where parts of the side windows were intact and she saw her own reflection. It shocked
her. A straggly, pale thing with dirty clothes and sunken eyes looked back at her. She had expected to see the brighteyed,
cocky hab-girl with the flashy piercings and snarling smile.
Seeing the leanness of her own face, she realised how hungry she was. She’d been blocking the feeling. Her empty
belly knotted and ached with such sudden fury that she dropped to the ground for a moment, sitting on a cinder block
until the pain eased enough for her to stand without cramps or wooziness.
She took the flask from her belt and sipped a few, precious mouthfuls from the drink-spout. Half full, it was the
last of a box of electrolyte fluid bottles she’d recovered from a mining store near Vervun Smeltery One. She was
sure that the fluid-packs were the main reason she’d kept herself and the children alive for the last month.
She hooked the flask back onto her belt and then took out her blade. The back fence of the military compound was
just a few metres away now. It seemed deserted. Maybe they were all fighting at the gate. It sounded like it.
Her brother Nake had given her the blade on her tenth year-day, just a few weeks before he was killed in a
gangfight in Down-Reach under the Main Spine. Nake Criid had been a member of the Verves, one of the key undergangs,
and the knife’s handle was decorated with a carefully carved Verve crest: a laughing skull resting in the dip of
a gothic V Tona sported a few gang badges herself— an ear-stud, a buckle, a small snake-tat on her shoulder — but
she’d never been properly blooded into any gang to speak of. She had run with a few gang crowds and known a boy
or two who’d been gang-blooded. While she was with them, they’d each tried to induct her, but she’d resisted. The
one thing Tona Criid had always known, ever since Nake had died of stab wounds in an unlit, Down-Reach sewer
seven years ago, was that ganger life was dumb and pointless and short. She’d make her own way in life, be her own
master, or get nowhere at all.
The blade was a compact chain-form: a thick, decorated grip with an extending blade of steel fifteen centimetres
long. A flick of the rubberised stud on the index-finger ridge activated an internal power-cell that made the bladeedge
vibrate so fast it looked still. But, gak, could it cut!
She touched the stud and the blade purred. She switched it off and crawled towards the flakboard fence.
The supply barn was dark and as stacked with supplies as she remembered it. She couldn’t read many of the labels
on the crate stacks, so it was a matter of cutting them open and sampling them.
The first she tried was full of small flat boxes packed with bootlaces.
The second had cartons of stoppered metal tubes. Hoping they might be food-paste, she squeezed a coil of black
matter out into her palm and licked it.
She spat, retching. If this is what the off-world fighters ate, they were truly from another world.She moved on,
leaving the half-squeezed tube of camo-paint on the floor behind her.
Ear-pieces with wires and plugs. Powercells. Rolls of gauze in paper wraps that smelled of disinfectant.
In the next crate-stack, foil-packs of freeze-dried buckwheat porridge. Better. She dropped half a dozen into her
bag, then added a handful more. She’d eat them dry if she couldn’t find water. Then she found chemical blocks for
firelighting and a pile went into her bag. Next, metal beakers. She prised one out of its packing, then another. Dalin
would want his own.
In the next row, pay dirt: corn crackers in long, plastic tubes, soya bars in vacuum-packets. She pushed a dozen or
more into her bag and bladed one open, cramming the soft, wet food into her mouth and gulping it down, brine
dribbling down her chin and pattering on the floor.
Tona froze, mid-swallow, her cheeks bulging, her stomach gnawing at her with the sudden input of food. A noise,
behind her, to the right, a noise her wolfish chewing had half-hidden. She ducked into cover.
A flashlight flickered between supply stacks, three rows away. She willed herself invisible and huddled behind a
tower of mess-tin crates, the blade in her hand. The beam of light jiggled around and she heard a voice, uttering a
snarl. The sudden crack and flash of a lasweapon made her jump out of her boots. A carrion-dog went racing past
her, yelping and trailing a burned hind leg.
She relaxed a little. The voice said something in an accent she couldn’t work out. The flashlight wavered, then
moved off and away.
She darted across the aisle into the next bank of crates. A few slices of her knife, all the while listening to the
darkness around her. Nutrient packs for first aid. Tins of soup that heated themselves when the foil strip was pulled
out. Jars of air-dried vegetables in oil. Small, flat cans of preserved fish. Cartons of heat-treated milk.
She took a handful of them all. Her pack was heavy now and she was pushing her luck. Time to go.
Light jabbed down into her face, making her cry out, and a hand grabbed her shoulder.
Tona Criid had been taught to fight by her brothers, all of them gangers. Instinctively, she pivoted back into the
grip and shoulder-threw the owner of the hand. The flashlight bounced away across the rockcrete barn floor and the
heavy male form bounced after it, barking out an oath and most of its breath.
But it had her still, and even as it went over her, it twisted her round in combat-trained hands and threw her
sideways into the crate stack.
The impact stunned her. She tried to rise, hearing the other moving too. A few more oaths, a harsh question she
didn’t understand.
She rose and delivered a spin-kick into the darkness. It would be the VPHC, she was sure. She braced for the lasshot,
the bolt-round, the mindset that would treat her no better than a carrion-dog.
Her spinning foot connected and the figure went down with a bone-crack. More rampant cursing.
Tona ran for the crack in the barn wall.
A much larger form tackled her from behind in the dark and brought her down on her belly on the rockcrete floor.
She was frantic now, kicking and thrashing.
Her assailant had her pinned by way of superior strength and technique. His weight slumped on top of her and the
flashlight winked on again, probing down at her wincing eyes.
“It’s all right, it’s all right,” said a hoarse voice in tunefully accented Low Gothic. “Don’t fight me.”
She looked up, fighting still. She saw the face of the off-world soldier, the young one, the man who had chased
Dalin out of the barn weeks before.
The blade purred in her hand and she sliced it upwards.
Caffran saw the vibro-blade coming and threw himself aside, releasing his captive. It was the gang girl, the beautiful
one he had glimpsed across the rubble when he had gone chasing the boy.
She was on her feet now, menacing with the buzzing blade, head down. Knife-combat stance, thought Caffran,
good enough to be a Ghost.
“Put it down,” he said carefully. “I can help you.”
She turned and ran, heading for the slit in the fibre-board back wall of the barn.
Caffran pulled out his laspistol, braced his aiming hand and fired three times, blowing a ring of holes in the back
wall of the shed around her. Daylight streamed in through the punctures. She skidded to a halt, frozen, as if expecting
the next one to let the light shine through her too.
Caffran got to his feet, gun raised. “I can help you,” he repeated. “I don’t want to see you live like that. You’ve got
children, right, a boy at least? What do you need?”
She turned slowly to face him and his light, blade in one hand, the other raised against the stabbing beam. Caffran
lowered it so it wouldn’t blind her.
“Trick,” she said.
“What?”
“This is a trick. just shoot me, you gak.”
“No trick.” He stepped forward and holstered his pistol. “No trick.”
She flew at him, blade slicing the air. He flinched and grabbed her arms, rolling backwards to deposit her flat on
her own back. The impact knocked her out for a moment.
Caffran kicked the purring blade away.
He pulled her up. She was coughing and gasping. She felt so thin and fragile in his hands, though he knew she was
mean and tough enough to hurt him.
“What’s your name?” he asked.
Her jabbing fingers punched into his eyes and he bellowed, rolling back and clutching his face.
By the time he struggled up again, she was pushing through the back wall to freedom. Caffran noticed she had been
mindful enough to recover her blade.
He ran after her.
“Feth you, stop! I want to help! Stop!”
She looked back at him, her eyes as wild and mad as an animal. Her bulging pack was caught on a fork of fibreboards,
preventing her from squeezing through the hole.
“Get away! Get away!” she shrilled.
He approached her, hands held wide and empty, trying to look unthreatening.
“I won’t hurt you… please… my name is Caffran. My friends call me Caff. I’m a lost soul like you. Just a Ghost
without a home. I didn’t ask for this and I know you fething didn’t. Please.”
He was a hand’s reach away from her now, hating the fear in her face. She spat and howled, then jabbed her blade
round and cut the strap of her pack. It dropped to the ground, but she was free. Abandoning it, she flew out of the bam
and sprinted away across the rubble.
Caffran pushed out after her, straining to get his greater bulk through the slit.
He got a glimpse of her looking back and terrified, darting over the splintered mounds of wreckage before
dropping out of sight.
Tona lay in cover for a few minutes, buried in the soot of a crater, stinking corpses around her. When it seemed the
soldier was not following, she crawled out and ran a few metres to a slumped wall and hid behind it.
Then she heard a crunch of boots on rubble and froze.
Twenty metres away, looking in the wrong direction, the black-uniformed soldier was walking up through the
ruins, her pack dangling from his hand.
“Hello?” he was calling. “Hello? You need this. You really do. Hello?”
He stood for a long while, maybe ten minutes, looking around. Tona remained in hiding. Finally, the soldier put the
pack down.
“It’s here if you want it,” he said. A long pause.
Then he walked back down the ruin slope and clambered back into the bam.
Tona waited a full fifteen minutes more before she moved. She ran from cover, scooped up the pack and leapt
away into the confused maze of the ruins.
The soldier didn’t reappear or follow.
In a foxhole, she hunched and opened the pack, studying the contents. Everything she had taken was there,
everything — as well as three flasks of sterilised water, a field-dressing kit, a pack of one-shot antibiotic jabs, some
net-wrapped dry sausage… and a laspistol, the very laspistol she was sure he had fired after her in the barn. The
charge pack was almost full.
She was dazed for a while, then she laughed. Gleeful, she took up the sack of trophies and ran back to her shelter,
taking a wide route so she wouldn’t be followed.
It was only later, after she and Dalin had eaten their first good meal in a month and Yoncy was sleeping and
content on milk-broth, that she found the cap-pin at the bottom of the pack: silver, clean, an Imperial eagle with the
double head and the inscription Tanith First, by the Grace of the God-Emperor of Terra on the scroll held in the
clawed feet.
In the gloomy dugout, her belly full, her wards fed and content, Tona Criid sat back by the light of a fire kindled
from Guard-issue chemical blocks and wondered where she would pin the crest. As gang-badges went, it was better
than most.
Behind Veyveyr Gate, the dead dominated the streets and squares.
Teams of Vervun Primary, work militia and Munitorum labourers, their faces masked by breathers or strips of torn
cloth, carried the dead from the battle away from the smouldering railhead and laid them out in the open places north
of Veyveyr for identification and disposal.
Agun Soric had brought his workforce in from the Commercia Refuge after the fighting had died down, and he had
put them to work assisting the morbid but necessary duty.
He wanted to fight. Gak, but that brave Vervun Primary officer — what was his name? Racine! The one who’d
given them the chance to pull their weight preparing the defence. He’d given Soric the taste of it. But for want of
proper weapons, Soric and his people would have been at the front that morning. Let Ferrozoica tremble to face the
wrath of smeltery workers from Vervun One with the blood up!
From what he’d been able to learn from those milling about him — some off-world Guard, some NorthCol —
Soric knew the ferocious battle had ended with Zoica pushed out against all odds. He hoped to see Racine soon and
slap the man’s back and hear how the pioneer efforts his workers had put in had helped to win the day by building
defences the enemy couldn’t overrun.
There was time enough. With smeltery workers Gannif, Fafenge and Modj, Soric began loading corpses onto a
handcart. It was filthy bestial work. They tried to wrap each body in a skein of linen and they’d been told to take tags
and mark the identity of each on a data-slate. But some bodies didn’t come up in one piece. Some were only parts.
Some parts didn’t match up obviously with others.
Some were still alive.
The place was a charnel house. Bodycarts moved all around them, medical and clearance personnel milled around
and the wounded shuffled in slow, weary lines away from the gate railhead, many exhibiting awful injuries. Every
now and then, they made way for a truck or a trundling medical Chimera, speeding away to the medical halls.
Soric, his hip braced on his axe-rake crutch, leaned down and slid his paper-gloved hands under the armpits of a
blackened, legless corpse.
As he raised the cadaver, it groaned.
“Medic! Medic!” he cried out, pulling back from the ruined thing he had been touching.
A thickset medical officer pushed through the milling crowd, a man in his fifties with a silver beard and the look
of an off-worlder about him. Under his hall-issue crimson apron he wore black fatigues and Guard-issue boots.
“Alive?” the medic asked Soric.
“Gak me, I suppose so. Tried to move him.”
The medic took out a flexible tube, put one end to his ear and the other to the blackened torso.
“Dead. You must have squeezed air out of the lungs when you lifted him.”
Soric nodded as the medic stood up, folding his scope-tube away into his shoulder-slung pack.
“You’re off-world, right?” asked Soric.
“What?” asked the medic, distracted.
“Off-worlder?”
The medic nodded curtly. “Tanith First. Chief medic.”
Soric stuck out a hand, then pulled the paper glove off it. “Thank you,” he said.
The medic paused, surprised, then took the hand and shook it.
“Dorden, Gaunt’s First-and-Only.”
“Soric. I used to run that place.” Soric gestured over his shoulder at the ruin of Vervun Smeltery One east of the
railhead.
“This is a bad time for all of us,” Dorden said, studying the bullish, noble man who leaned on his crutch, black
with ash.
Soric nodded.
“That eye wound… has it been treated?” asked Dorden, stepping forward.
Soric held up his hand. “Old news, friend, weeks old. There are others more needy of your skills.”
As if on cue, VPHC troops wheeled past a cart carrying a screaming, blood-soaked NorthCol soldier.
Mtane and one of Curth’s people hurried to it.
Dorden looked round at Soric. “You thanked me. Why?”
Soric shrugged. “I’ve been through this from the start. We were left to die. You didn’t have to come here but you
did and I thank you for it.”
Dorden shook his head. “Warmaster Macaroth sends us where he wills. I’m glad to be able to help, however.”
“Without you off-worlders, Vervunhive would be dead. That’s why I thank you.”
“I appreciate it. Mine is often a thankless task.”
“Have you seen Major Racine? Vervun Primary? He’s a good man…”
Dorden shook his head and turned to where stretcher-bearers were beginning to bring the Tanith wounded out of
the warzone. Troopers Milo and Baffels were carrying Manik, howling from the wound to his groin, blood dribbling
over the edges of the stretcher.
Dorden moved in to deal with Manik. He was sure the young trooper was going to bleed out any moment.
He looked around at Baffels and Milo as he worked. “Racine? You know what happened to him?”
Dorden’s hands were already slippery with Manik’s blood. The groin artery had burst and he couldn’t tie it. It was
pulling back into the body cavity and Dorden bellowed for Lesp to bring dean blades.
“Major Racine?” Milo said, standing back from Manik’s stretcher, adjusting the dressing on his shoulder wound.
“He died. Under a flat-crab. He killed it, but he died.”
Soric listened to the off-world boy and shook his head sadly.
Lesp stumbled over the rubble and brought Dorden a scalpel. Dorden used it to try and open the screaming
Manik’s groin wide enough so he could push his fingers in and pull the severed artery down to clamp it. It was too
late. Manik bled out through his body cavity and died with Dorden’s hand still inside him.
“Let me take him,” Soric said and, with his men, he gently lifted Manik’s body onto his wheel-cart. Dorden was
almost shocked by the reverence.
“Every soul for the hive, and the hive for every soul,” Soric said over his shoulder to the blood-soaked Dorden as
he wheeled the dead Ghost away.
* * *
Ana Curth moved her orderlies through the confusion of Veyveyr Gate. There were more dead to recover than living.
She checked each corpse in turn, pulled off the tags and then left them for the recovery units.
She hesitated slightly when she found the corpses of Tanith. These were all Dorden’s friends. She took off their
tags carefully and entered all the names in her dataslate.
In the gateway of Veyveyr, she paused. She checked the latest set of tags three times to be sure.
Tears welled in her eyes and she pushed the bloody tags into her apron-front.
The thirty-second day drew to a close. It was a day the citizens of Vervun-hive would remember perhaps more
keenly than anything that had taken place so far. Despite the success of driving back the First Storm three days
before, this seemed much more of a victory. Scant hours after the battle, the defence of Veyveyr began to take on a
mythical flavour. In the Spine, the habs and the refuges alike, Vervunhivers spoke of it as a turning point, as the start
of deliverance.
Public-address plates across the hive broadcast triumphant slogans, sanitised accounts of the battle and pictures
from the glorious front, mainly those showing the People’s Hero raising the flag in the shattered gate-mouth,
surrounded by jubilant Vervun Primary troopers. In the Basilica of the Ecclesiarchy, a victory mass was organised,
featuring a choir of over ten thousand and long liturgical readings from the Codex Imperialis. Loudspeakers
broadcast the worship across all the hive levels.
Spontaneous celebrations began in different areas and some revels — amongst Vervun Primary troops heady with
relief — were broken up by the VPHC.
But the mood was impossible to suppress in the highest and lowest quarters of the hive. Oilcan fires were lit along
the wharves and in the refuges, and drums, many homemade or improvised, thundered into the night. There were
many reports of decadent banqueting in the High Spine, as merchants and house ordinary families abandoned the
rationing restrictions and indulged in sumptuous private dinners of unstinting debauchery.
When Gaunt heard about them, he sighed. These were either gestures of ignorance or acts of denial against what
must surely still await.
But let them have their delights, he decided. They may be their last.
In a grim mood, he’d stayed on at Veyveyr as the light failed, touring his men, noting those lost, restructuring
squads around those losses. He gave Trooper Baffels a field promotion to sergeant and placed him in charge of Fols’
unit. The stocky, bearded trooper was almost overcome with emotion as Neskon, Domor, Milo and the others
cheered him. He shook Gaunt’s hand and wiped away a tear that trickled down over his blue claw tattoo. There had
been a brief rumour that Gaunt would award the sergeant pin to Milo, but that was absurd. He was barely a trooper
and it wouldn’t look right, though Milo’s actions and improvised leadership at Veyveyr had won him a considerable
respect that sat well with his reputation as the avatar of Gaunt.
Under Corbec’s command, the Tanith units who had seen action at Veyveyr pulled out to a mustering yard north of
the Spoil, and fresh units under Rawne, partnered with Volpone forces commanded by Colonel Corday, moved in to
hold the gate position. Stonemasons, metalworkers and engineers from the hab workforce were called up to assist the
sapper units in defending the gate. Using fallen stone from the gate top, the masons erected two well-finished dyke
walls just outside the gate, and the incandescent glare of oxylene torches fizzled in the night rain as the metalwrights
crafted pavises and hoardings from broken tank plates. Sections of rail — and there were kilometres of it scattered
throughout the railhead — were broken up and welded into cross-frames to carry barbed wire and razorwire strings.
In an intensive twelve-hour period, with work continuing throughout the night under lamp-rigs, the workforce raised
impressive concentric rings of well-built defences both inside and outside the broken gate. There were ramps along
the eastern edge to allow forward access for the NorthCol tank files marshalled behind the troop lines. A forest of
howitzers, barrels raised almost upright like slightly leaning trees, was established on the site of the main terminus,
with a clear field of fire to bombard up and beyond the gate.
In the mustering yard, weary Tanith and NorthCol units from the front sprawled on rolled up jackets or on the
hardpan itself, many falling asleep as soon as they got off their feet. Mess trucks with tureens of soup, baskets of
bread and crates of weak beer arrived to tend them. It was estimated that they would be there until dawn, when the
arterial routes would be finally clear enough for transports to carry them back to their billets.
In the gloomy rear section of a NorthCol Chimera, Corbec and Bulwar shared a bottle and dissected the day. The
performance of the Vervun troops and of Modile especially was cursed frequently. The bottle was vintage sacra from
Corbec’s own stock and he broke the wax-foil stamp with relish. Bulwar had set his power-claw on a metal rack
and, flexing fingers stiff from the glove, produced two shot glasses from a leather box, and a tin of fat smokes, the
best brand the Northern Collective hives produced.
Bulwar had never tasted the Tanith liquor before, but he didn’t flinch and Corbec wasn’t surprised. Bulwar was as
grizzled and hardened a soldier as any Corbec had met in his career. They clinked glasses again.
“Anvil,” Corbec toasted, letting blue smoke curl out of his mouth to wreath his face.
Bulwar nodded. “Let’s hope we don’t need it again. But I have an ache in my leg that says there’s a measure left
before us.”
“Your leg?”
Bulwar tapped his right thigh. “Metal hip. A stub round during the moon war. Hurts like buggery when it’s damp
— and worse when trouble’s coming.”
“Weather’s changing. More rain on the way.”
“That’s not why it’s aching.”
Corbec refilled their glasses.
“But for this moon war, you’ve never been off this place?”
“No,” replied Bulwar. “Wanted to muster for the Guard at the last founding, but I was a major by then and my path
was set. Planetary Defence, like my father and his before him.”
“It’s a noble calling. I could have wished for it myself, commanding the garrison of a city back home.”
“Where is that again? Tanith?”
Corbec toyed with the tiny glass in his paw. He pursed his lips. “Dead and gone. We’re the last of it.”
“How?”
“We were founding, the first founding Tanith had made. Three regiments assembled to join the warmaster’s
crusade. This was just after Balhaut, you understand. Gaunt had been sent to knock us into shape. There was a… a
miscalculation. A Chaos fleet slipped through the interdiction set up by the advancing Segmentum Pacificus navy and
assaulted Tanith. Gaunt had a choice: Get out with those troop elements he could save, or stay and die with the
planet.”
“And he chose the former…”
“Like any good commander would. I like old Ibram Gaunt, but he’s a commissar at heart. Hardline, worships the
Emperor above his own life, dedicated to discipline. He took us out, about two thousand of us, and Tanith burned as
we left it behind. We’ve been paying back the enemy ever since.”
Bulwar nodded. “That’s why you’re called Ghosts, I suppose?”
Corbec chuckled and poured some more sacra for them both.
Bulwar was silent for a while. “I can’t imagine what it’s like to lose your homeworld.” Corbec didn’t make the
reply that flashed into his mind, but Bulwar saw the logic of his own words and spoke the unspoken anyway. “I hope
I don’t find out.”
Corbec raised his glass. “By the spirit of my lost world,” he said mischievously, glancing at the sacra, “may we
Ghosts ensure there are never any Verghast ghosts.”
They downed their drinks with heartfelt gulps. Bulwar got up and began to rummage in a footlocker bolted to the
carrier’s hull. He pulled out map-cases, ammo-cans and a sheaf of signal flags before finding what he was looking
for: a tall-shouldered bottle of brown glass. “We’ve toasted with your Tanith brew, which I commend for its fine
qualities, but it’s only fair we toast now with a Verghast vintage. Joiliq. Ten year old, cask-fermented.”
Corbec smiled. “I’ll try anything once.” He knocked it back, savoured it, smiled again. “Or twice,” he said,
proffering his glass.
By a roaring oil-drum fire, Baffels sat with Milo, Venar, Filain and Domor. Filain and Venar were snoring, propped
against each other. Domor was spooning soup into his mouth with weary, almost mechanical motions.
“I want you with me,” Baffels said quietly to Milo.
“Sergeant?”
“Oh, stop it with that crap! These pins should have been yours.”
Milo laughed and Filain looked up at the noise for a moment before slumping and snoring again.
“I’ve been a trooper for all of ten seconds. And I’m the youngest Tanith in the regiment. Gaunt would never have
been crazy enough to make me sergeant. You deserve it, Baffels. No one denies it should be yours.”
Baffels shrugged. “You led us today. No one denied that either. You’re trusted.”
“So are you and we worked as a team. If they followed me at all it’s only because you did. They may think of me
as some lucky fething charm, touched by the commissar himself, but it’s you they respect.”
“We did okay though, didn’t we?”
Milo nodded.
“Whatever you say, I want you at point, right up near me, okay?”
“You’re the sergeant.”
“And I’m making a command decision. The men respect you, so if you’re near me and with me, they’ll follow me
too.”
Milo looked into the fire. He could sense Baffels was scared by his new responsibilities. The man was a great
soldier, but he’d never expected unit command. He didn’t want to fail and Milo knew he wouldn’t, just as Gaunt had
known when he’d made the promotion. But if it helped Baffels’ confidence, Milo would do as he was asked.
Certainly, through that strange, organic process Milo had observed in the firefight that morning, soldiers chose their
own leaders in extremis, and Baffels and Milo had been chosen.
“Where’s Tanith, d’you think?”
Milo glanced round, initially assuming Baffels had asked a rhetorical question. But the older man was looking up
at the sky.
“Tanith?”
“Which of those stars did we come from?”
Milo gazed up. The Shield was a glowing aura of green light, fizzing with rain that fell outside. But even so, they
could just glimpse the starfields pricking the blackness.
Milo chose one at random.
“That one,” he said.
“You sure?”
“Absolutely.”
It seemed to please Baffels and he stared at the winking light for a long time.
“D’you still have your pipes?”
Milo had been a musician back on Tanith and before he’d made trooper he’d played the pipes into battle.
“Yes,” he said. “Never go anywhere without them.”
“Play up, eh?”
“Now?”
“My first order as sergeant.”
Milo pulled the tight roll of pipes and bellows from his knapsack. He cleared the mouth-spout and then puffed the
bag alive, making it whine and wail quietly. The hum of conversation died down at fires all around at the first sound.
Pumping his arm, he got the bellows breathing and the drone began, rising up in a clear, keening note. “What shall
I play?” he asked, his fingers ready on the chanter.
“My Love Waits in the Nalwoods Green,” Domor said suddenly from beside him.
Milo nodded. The tune was the unofficial anthem of Tanith, more sprightly than the actual planetary anthem, yet
melancholy and almost painful for any man of Tanith to hear.
He began to play. The tune rose above the yard, above the flurries of sparks rising from the oil drums. One by one,
the men began to sing.
“What is that?” asked Bulwar hoarsely as Corbec sang softly. Across the yard, the NorthCol men were silent as the
bitter, haunting melody filled the air. “A song sung by ghosts,” Corbec said as he reached for the sacra..
The Main Spine rang with the sound of massed voices. In the halls of the Legislature and the grand regimental chapel
of House Command, victory choirs thousands strong sang victory masses and hymns of deliverance.
Crossing a marble colonnade with Captain Daur and several officers on the approach to House Command, Gaunt
paused on a balcony and looked down into the regimental chapel auditorium. He sent his contingent on ahead and
stood watching the mass for a while. Twelve hundred singers in golden robes, red-bound hymnals raised to their
chests, gave voice to the hymn “Behold! The Triumph of Terra” in perfect harmony, and the air vibrated.
The auditorium’s high, arched roof was adorned with company banners and house flags, and censer smoke
billowed into the candlelit air. A procession of Ministorum clerics carrying gilt standards and reliquary boxes, their
long ceremonial trains supported by child servitors, shuffled down the main aisle towards the Imperial Shrine,
where Intendant Banefail and Master Legislator Anophy waited. There were hooded Administratum officials in the
procession and three astropaths from the guild, their satin-wrapped bulks bulging with tubes and pipes and feedlinks.
The astropaths were carried on litters by adult servitors, and many of the tubes and pipes issuing from the
folds of their cloaks were plugged to cogitator systems built into the silver-plated litter-pallets.
“It lifts the heart, does it not?” a voice from behind Gaunt asked.
Gaunt turned. It was Kowle.
“If it lifts the morale of Vervunhive, so be it. In truth, it is premature.”
“Indeed?” Kowle frowned, as if not convinced. “I am going to House Command. Will you walk with me?”
Gaunt nodded and the two grim, black figures in peaked caps strode together down the marble colonnade under the
flickering ball-lamps strung along the walls.
“This day has seen victory, yet you seem low in spirit.”
Gaunt grunted. “We drove them off. Call it a victory. It was bought too costly and the cost was unnecessary.”
“May I ask on what you base that assessment, colonel-commissar?”
They strode under a high arch where banners flapped in the cool air. The choir echoed after them.
“Vervunhive’s command and control systems are inadequate for a military endeavour of this magnitude. The
system broke down. Deployment was crippled behind the front and devastated at the sharp end. There is much to be
criticised in the command structure of the Vervun Primary itself.”
Kowle stopped short. “I would take such criticisms personally. I am, after all, the chief disciplinary officer of this
hive.”
Gaunt stopped as well and turned back to face Kowle. There was an immoderate darkness in the man’s face. “You
seem to excel in your duties, Commissar Kowle. You understand, better than any man I have ever met, the uses of
propaganda and persuasion. But I wonder if you hold the officer ranks in place by force of will and fear rather than
sound tactical order. The commanders of Vervun Primary have no experience of war on this scale. They know what
they know from texts and treatises. They must be made to acknowledge the experience of active field officers.”
“Such as yourself and the other Guard commanders like General Grizmund?”
“Just so. I trust I can count on your support in this when we meet with House Command. I want you with me,
Kowle. We can’t be pushing from different angles.”
“Of course. I am of one mind with you on this, colonel-commissar.”
They walked on. Gaunt could read Kowle’s soothing tone — and he despised it. He was well aware of the two
dozen requests for transfer back into the active Guard which Kowle had made in the past three years. A master
politico, Kowle was clearly courting Gaunt’s favour, assuming Gaunt could make a good report and effect him that
transfer.
“I understand you executed Modile,” Kowle said matter-of-factly.
“A necessary measure. His negligence was criminal.”
“It was, as you described, his inexperience, that let him down. Was summary execution too harsh for a man who
might yet learn?”
“I hope you would have done the same, Kowle. Modile caused many deaths by his inaction and fear. That cannot
be conscienced. He ignored both pre-orders and direct commands from above.”
Kowle nodded. “Where a seasoned Guard commander would have held fast to the chain of command.”
“Indeed.”
Kowle smiled. It was an alarming expression on such a cruel face. “Actually, I applaud your action. Decisive,
forceful, true to the spirit of the Commissariat. Many have feared the great Gaunt has grown soft now he has a
command of his own, that his commissarial instinct might have been diluted. But you disabused that notion today
with Modile.”
“I’m glad to hear it.”
They had arrived at a set of great doors ornate with golden bas-relief. Vervun Elite troops in dress uniforms
crusted with brocade, with plumes sprouting from their helmet spikes, opened the doors to admit them.
Beyond the doors, the audience theatre of House Command was seething with voices and commotion.
General Nash was at the lectern, trying to speak, but the noble houses were shouting him down. Junior Vervun
Primary officers were stamping in their tiered seats and jeering, and Roane Deeper adjutants were yelling back at
them, urged on by officers from NorthCol, the Narmenians and the Volpone.
Vice Marshal Anko rose to his feet, slamming his white-gloved hand into the bench-head for silence.
“While I welcome the aid our off-world kin have rendered us, I find this an affront. General Nash condemns our
military organisations and says we are ill-equipped to deal with this fight. An insult, no less, no more! Does his
highness General Sturm share this view?”
Sturm rose. “War, honoured gentlemen,” he began in soothing, mellow tones, “is a confusion. Emotions run high. It
is hard to say if a system is right or wrong until it is found wanting in the fire of battle. The Vervun Primary are
exemplary soldiers, well-drilled and highly motivated. Their bravery is beyond question. That our command
channels clashed during today’s engagement is simply unfortunate. It is not the fault of Vervun officers. I have already
issued standing orders to range the vox-channels so that there will be no further overlap. Any deaths that have
resulted from this misfortune are greatly regretted. Such incidents will not recur.”
“What about discipline?” Gaunt’s voice cut across the great hall and all the faces turned to look. Gaunt walked to
the end of the chamber and stepped up to the lectern. Kowle took his place on the front bench next to Anko.
“Colonel-commissar?” Marshal Croe rose and looked down the vast hall into Gaunt’s eyes. “Is there another
matter? General Nash has already been unkind enough to reprimand Vervunhive for its weakness in command. Do
you share that view?”
“In part, marshal. The communication problems General Sturm has referred to were only a piece of the crisis we
faced today. We were lucky to survive the Veyveyr assault.”
Anko jumped to his feet. “And have we not our own hero, Commissar Kowle, to thank for turning that crisis
around?”
The hall broke out in ripples of applause and cheers, mainly from the Vervun majority. Kowle accepted the
applause with a gracious, modest nod. Gaunt knew better than to point out the cosmetic nature of Kowle’s
involvement.
“Commissar Kowle’s actions are a matter of record. History will record the nature of his contribution to the
Vervunhive war.” Gaunt couched his response carefully. “But the line of command failed severely during Veyveyr.
Field commanders of the Vervun Primary, whose bravery is beyond question, failed to relay strategic orders or were
unable — or unwilling — to redirect their forces in the face of the assault.”
Jeers and boos thundered down at Gaunt.
“I understand you have already exacted discipline, colonel-commissar,” Anko said stiffly.
“And I will do so again,” Gaunt raised his voice above the background roar. “But that simply punishes the
symptoms of the problem. It does not address the heart of it.”
“That problem being a failure to obey direct orders?” Kowle asked, rising to his feet amid more cheers.
Gaunt nodded. “Chain of command must be observed at all times. Any who break it must do so knowing they risk
the highest penalty. Without such order and control, this war will be lost. I trust Vervun Primary will respect this
philosophy from now on.”
“So all who transgress must be punished?” Kowle asked.
He wants his transfer badly, Gaunt thought. He’s supporting me every step of the way.
“Of course. Without the threat of sanction, insubordination will continue.”
“Then you will support the punishment of General Grizmund?” asked Vice Marshal Anko.
“What?”
“General Grizmund — who broke orders this day and began his own deployment of the Narmenian armour?” Now
the Narmenian staff booed and heckled.
Gaunt faltered. “I… I was not aware of this. It must have been a mistake. General Grizmund has my complete
confidence and—”
“So, one rule for the locals, another for the Guard?” sneered Anko.
“I didn’t say that. I—”
“General Grizmund defied direct orders from House Command and redeployed his tanks through noble house
territory. Forgetting the collateral damage he caused, is not his action worthy of the most severe censure?” Tarrian of
the VPHC looked across at Gaunt. “That was the philosophy you were advocating, wasn’t it?”
Gaunt looked away from the hooded eyes of the VPHC commandant and found Kowle’s face in the throng. Kowle
smiled back at him, unblinking, soulless.
He knew. He had known about Grizmund even before they had reached the chamber. He had manoeuvred Gaunt
right into this trap.
Gaunt realised in an instant he had underestimated Kowle’s ambition. The man was after more than a simple
transfer off Verghast. He was after glory and command.
“Well, colonel-commissar? What do we do with Grizmund?” asked Anko.
Gaunt stepped away from the lectern and strode down the hall to the exit, yells and cat-calls showering over him.
Outside, he grabbed one of the Vervun Elite minding the door by the brocade and slammed him into the wall.
“Grizmund! Where is he?”
“In the s-stockade, sir! Level S-sub-40!”
Gaunt released him and strode away.
The rousing hymns of the great choirs shivered the air around him. Their sentiments sounded all too hollow.
The sunrise was an hour away.
A file of Ghosts moved up from trucks parked on the eastern hab expressway and entered the manufactory depots
that backed on to the Spoil.
Thirty men, the cream of the Tanith scout cadre. The Vervun troops occupying the location, soldiers of the socalled
Spoilers unit, greeted them in the undercroft of an ore barn. The air was thick with rock-dust and the light was
poor, issuing from a few hooded lamps nailed to the wall.
“Gak” Ormon, the major in command of the Spoilers, saluted as Mkoll led his men in. He was a big, bulky man
with bloodshot eyes and a flamer-burned throat.
“I understand you have good snipers and stealthers,” Ormon said to Mkoll as he walked over to a chart table with
him. Mkoll nodded. He surveyed the chart. The Spoil, a vast heap of slag, was a real vulnerability for Vervunhive.
They knew as much, otherwise they wouldn’t have formed a dedicated defence force, but the battle of the day before
had decimated the Spoiler unit.
“General Sturm has acknowledged the Tanith ability in such endeavours. We’re here to support you.”
“Gak” Ormon’s great bulk was clad in the blue greatcoat and spiked helmet of the Vervun Primary. He looked
down at the wiry off-worlder with his faded black fatigues and curious piebald cape. He was not impressed.
All of the Spoilers present, including Ormon, carried long-barrelled autoguns with scopes dedicated to sniping.
Their faces were striped with bars of black camo-paint. Several had fresh wounds bound tightly.
Sergeant Mkoll called up his men so they could all study the chart. The Ghosts grouped around the table, making
comments, pointing.
“Why don’t you just give them orders?” Ormon asked disdainfully.
“Because I want them to know the situation and understand the terrain. How can they defend an area effectively
otherwise? Don’t you do the same?”
Ormon said nothing.
Mkoll broke his men into work-teams and sent them away in different directions, though not before checking they
had set their micro-beads to the same channel.
Ormon joined Mkoll as the sergeant led his group of MkVenner, Domor, Larkin and Rilke up shattered internal
stairways to the third storey overlooking the slag heap. Nine Spoilers were stationed at the shattered windows up
here, using scopes to watch the sleek slopes of the Spoil.
The Ghosts took position amongst them.
Larkin and Rilke, both armed with sniper-variant lasguns, set themselves up carefully. Rilke used a length of pipe
to disguise the end of his gun as it protruded from the wall. Larkin covered his own gun down to the muzzle under
loose sacks.
Domor took Mkoll’s scope, set it up on a tripod stand in the shadow of a window and linked his mechanical eyes
to the sight. He could now see further and clearer than anyone in the fortification.
Ormon was about to ask Mkoll a question when he realised he and the Ghost called MkVenner had vanished.
Mkoll and MkVenner moved invisibly down the Spoil slope, their capes spread over them. The coal-like ore-refuse
was wet and slimy underfoot. They were outside the protection of the Shield and the night rain fell around them,
making puddles amongst the rock waste.
They raised their scopes. Beyond the Spoil, two kilometres away, they saw the open, flat land and the blasted habs
beyond. The heavy rain was creating standing water on the flat soil and the water was rippling like dimpled tin with
the rainfall. Visibility was down and cloud cover was descending.
There was a sound. MkVenner armed his lasgun and Mkoll crawled forward.
It was singing. Chanting. From out in the enemy positions, via loudhailers and speakers, a foul hymn of Chaos was
ringing out to answer the triumph hymns of the hive.
It grew louder.
Mkoll and MkVenner shuddered.
In the ore-works behind them, Ormon felt his bladder vice and hurried away.
At his position, Larkin tensed. He was weary from the day’s nerve-shredding battle and had only been sent in with
Mkoll’s men because of his skills as a sniper.
Every time he closed his eyes, he saw the face, the face of the Zoican.
Now, from below, down the length of the Spoil, he could hear them.
The Zoican filth were singing a name over and over, in a canon repeat.
Heritor Asphodel… Heritor Asphodel…
ELEVEN
THE HERITOR
“Kill us! Kill us all! In the name of Terra, before he—”
—Transcript of last broadcast from Ryxus V, the first “inherited” world
Level Sub-40 was almost a kilometre underground, deep in the foundation structure of the Main Spine. An armoured
lift cage with grilled sides transported Gaunt down the last three hundred metres, lowering him into an underworld
of dark, damp stone, stale air and caged sodium lamps.
He entered an underground concourse where ground water dripped from the pipework roof onto the concrete floor
and rusting chains dangled over piles of mildewed refuse. Along one side was a row of wooden posts with shackleloops
at wrist height. The wall behind the posts was stippled with bullet pocks and darkly stained.
Gaunt approached an adamantine shutter marked with yellow chevrons. Rockcrete bunkers stood on either side of
the shutter, blank except for letterbox slits set high up.
As he moved forward, automatic spotlights mounted above the hatch snapped on and bathed him with blue-white
light.
“Identify!” a voice crackled out of a vox-relay.
“Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt,” Gaunt replied curtly, reeling off his serial number afterwards.
“Your business?”
“Just open the shutter.”
There was a brief pause, then the great metal hatch screeched open. Gaunt stepped through and found himself
facing a second shutter. The one behind him slammed shut before the inner one would open.
Inside the stockade, a caged walkway led down into a dispatch area with an open-sided shower stall and low
tables for searching through personal effects. The sodium lamps gave the foetid, recirculated air a frosty hue.
Guards moved out of side bunkers to meet him. They were all VPHC troopers dressed in black shirts, black,
peaked caps, graphite-grey breeches and black boots. Each one wore orange arm-bands and wide, black, leather
belts with riot-batons and cuffs dangling from them. Three carried pump-action shotguns.
“Grizmund,” Gaunt told them briefly. He allowed himself to be frisked and handed over his bolt pistol. Two of the
guards then led him through a series of cage doors with remotely activated electric locks, down the austere, redwashed
hallways of the cell-block. There was an astringent ammonia stink of open drains, with a mouldering
aftertaste of deep rock and soil. Every sound rang out and echoed.
Grizmund and the four officers arrested with him were sharing a large communal holding tank. They still wore
their mustard-brown Narmenian uniforms, but caps, belts, laces and all rank pins had been removed.
Grizmund met Gaunt at the cage door. The VPHC guards refused to open it, so they were forced to talk through the
bars.
“I’m glad to see you,” Grizmund said. He was pale, and there was a dark look of anger in his eyes. “Get us out of
this.”
“Tell me what happened. In your own words,” Gaunt said.
Grizmund paused, then shrugged. “We were ordered to Veyveyr. Thanks to the gross idiocy of House Command
organisation, the routes were blocked. I took my column off the roadway and headed on to the gate through an
industrial sector. Next thing I knew, the VPHC were heading me off.”
“Did you disobey any direct order?”
“I was ordered to Veyveyr,” the man repeated. “I was told to take Arterial Route GH/7m. When I couldn’t get
through, I tried to achieve my primary order to reach the appointed frontline.”
“Did you strike a VPHC officer?”
“Yes. He drew a gun on me first, without provocation.”
Gaunt was quiet for a moment.
“You’d think these bastards didn’t want us to fight for them,” growled Grizmund.
“Their pride is hurt. The inadequacies of their command systems were shown up clearly today. They’re looking
for others to blame.”
“Screw them if they try to pin anything on me! This is crazy! Won’t Sturm back you up?”
“Sturm is too busy trying to please both sides. Don’t worry. I won’t let this continue a moment longer than it has
to.”
Grizmund nodded. Loud footsteps, unpaced and overlapping, reverberated down the dank cell-block behind them.
Gaunt turned to see Commissar Tarrian enter with an escort of VPHC troops.
“Commissar Gaunt. You shouldn’t be here. The Narmenian insubordination is a matter for the VPHC Disciplinary
Review. You will not interfere with Verghastian military justice. You will not confer with the prisoners. My men will
escort you back to the elevator.”
Gaunt nodded to Grizmund and walked over to the VPHC group, facing Tarrian for a moment. “You are making a
mistake both you and your cadre will regret, Tarrian.”
“Is that some kind of threat, Gaunt?”
“You’re a commissar, Tarrian, or at least you’re supposed to be. You must know commissars never issue threats.
Only facts.”
Gaunt allowed himself to be marched out of the stockade.
The thirty-third dawn was already on them, with heavy rain falling across the entire hive, the outer habs and the
grasslands beyond. Marshal Croe was taking breakfast in his retiring chamber off the war-room when Gaunt entered.
The room was long, gloomy and wood-panelled with gilt-framed oil paintings of past marshals lining the walls.
Croe sat at the head of a long, varnished mahogany table, picking at food laid out on a salver as he read through a
pile of data-slates. Behind him, the end wall of the room was armoured glass and overlooked the Commercia and
Shield Pylon. Backlit by the great window and the grey morning glare, Croe was a dark, brooding shape.
“Commissar.”
Gaunt saluted. “Marshal. The charges against the Narmenian officers must be dropped at once.”
Croe looked up, his noble, white-haired head inclining towards Gaunt like an eagle considering a lamb.
“Because?”
“Because they are utterly foolish and counterproductive. Because we need officers of Grizmund’s standing.
Because any punishment will send a negative message to the Narmenian units and to all Guard units as a whole: that
Vervunhive values the efforts of the off-world forces very little.”
“And what of the other view? You heard it yourself: one rule for Vervun, one for the Guard?”
“We both know that’s not true. Grizmund’s actions are hardly capital in nature, yet the VPHC seems hell-bent on
prosecuting them to the extreme. I’m not even sure this so-called ‘insubordination’ was even that. A tribunal would
throw it out, but to even get to a tribunal would be damaging. Narmenian and Guard honour would be slighted, and
the VPHC would be made to look stupid.” At the last minute, Gaunt managed to prevent himself from saying “even
more stupid.”
“Tarrian’s staff is very thorough. They would not undertake a tribunal if they thought it would collapse.”
“I am familiar with such ‘courts’, marshal. However, that will only happen if the VPHC are allowed to run the
hearing themselves.”
“It is their purview. Military discipline. It’s Tarrian’s job.”
“I will not allow the VPHC to conduct any hearing.”
Croe put down his fork and stared at Gaunt as if he had just insulted Croe’s own mother. He rose to his feet,
dabbing his mouth with a napkin.
“You won’t… allow it?”
Gaunt stood his ground. “Imperial Commissariat edict 4378b states that any activity concerning the discipline of
Imperial Guardsmen must be conducted by the Imperial Commissariat itself. Not by planetary bodies. It is not
Tarrian’s responsibility. It should not be a matter for the VPHC.”
“And you will enforce this ruling?”
“If I have to. I am the ranking Imperial commissar on Verghast.”
“The interpretation of law will be murderous. Any conflicts between Imperial and Planetary rules will be argued
over and over. Do not pursue this, Gaunt.”
“I’m afraid I have to, marshal. I am not a stranger to martial hearings. I will personally resource and provide all
the legal precedents I need to throw Tarrian, his thugs and his pitiful case to the wolves.”
A Vervun Primary adjutant hurried into the retiring room behind Gaunt.
“Not now!” barked Croe, but the man didn’t withdraw. He held out a data-slate to the fuming marshal.
“You — you need to see this, sir,” he stammered.
Croe snatched the slate out of the man’s hands and read it quickly. What he read arrested his attention, and he went
back and re-read slowly, his eyes narrowing.
Croe thrust the slate to Gaunt. “Read it yourself,” he said. “Our observers along the South Curtain have been
picking it up since daybreak.”
Gaunt looked through the transcripts recorded by the wall-guards as they scrolled across the glowing screen.
“Heritor Asphodel,” he murmured. He looked round at Croe. “I suggest you release Grizmund now. We’re going to
need all the men we can get.”
* * *
Gaunt and Croe left the retiring room together and strode down the short hall into the great control auditorium of
House Command. Both the lower level and the wrought-iron upper deck of the place were jostling with activity.
Hololithic projections of the warfront glowed upwards into the air from crenellated lens-pits in the floor, and the air
throbbed with vox-caster traffic, astropaths’ chants and the clack of the cogitator banks.
A gaggle of Munitorum staffers, Vervun Primary aides and technical operators hastened forward around the
marshal as he entered, but he waved them all away, crossing to the ironwork upper deck, his boots clanging up the
metal steps. Vice Marshal Anko, General Sturm, Commissar Kowle and General Xance of the NorthCol were
already assembled by the great chart table. Silent servitors, encrusted with bionics, and poised regimental aides
waited behind them. An occasional vox/pict drone bumbled across the command space. Gaunt hung back at the head
of the stairs, observing.
“Kowle?” asked Croe, approaching the chart table.
“No confirmation. It is impossible to confirm, lord marshal.”
Croe held up the data-slate. “But this is an accurate transcript of the enemy broadcasts? They’re chanting this at
the gates?”
“Since dawn,” replied Sturm. He looked bleary-eyed, and his grey and gold Volpone dress uniform was crumpled,
as if he had been roused hurriedly. “And not just chanting.”
He nodded and a servitor opened a vox-channel. A chatter of almost unintelligible noise rolled from the speaker.
“Vox-central has washed the signal clean. The name repeats on all band-widths as a voice pattern and also as
machine code, arithmetical sequence and compressed pict-representation.” Sturm fell silent. He reached for a cup of
caffeine on the edge of the chart table, his hand trembling.
“A blanket broadcast. They certainly want us to know,” Gaunt said.
Kowle looked round at him. “They want us to be scared,” he said snidely. “Just hours ago, you complimented me
on my ability to control information. We can presume the enemy are similarly efficient. This could be propaganda.
Demoralising broadcasts. They may simply be using the name as a terror device.”
“Possibly… but we agreed it would take a force of great charisma to turn a hive the size of Ferrozoica. Heritor
Asphodel is just such a force. His fate and whereabouts since Balhaut are unknown.”
Anko looked away from Gaunt deliberately and turned to Kowle. “You were on Balhaut, Kowle. What is this
creature?”
Kowle was about to speak when Gaunt cut across. “Both Kowle and I served on Balhaut. I believe the commissar
was deployed on the southwest continent, away from the main battle for the Oligarchy. I encountered the Heritor’s
forces personally.”
Kowle conceded. He could barely hide his bitterness at the memory. “The colonel-commissar may… have more
experience than me.”
Croe turned his hooded eyes back to Gaunt. “Well?”
“The Heritor was one of Archon Nadzybar’s foremost lieutenants, a warlord in his own right, personally
commanding a force of over a million. He was one of the chief commanders Nadzybar gathered in his great retinue to
form the vast enemy force which overran the Sabbat Worlds, Emperor damn him. Despite the notoriety of the other
warlords — filth like Sholen Skara, Nokad the Blighted, Anakwanar Sek, Qux of the Eyeless — Heritor Asphodel
remains the most notorious. His sworn aim, both before and after Archon Nadzybar co-opted him into the pact, was
to ‘inherit’ Imperium world after Imperium world and return them to what he saw as the ‘true state’ of Chaos. His
ruthlessness is immeasurable, his brutality staggering and the charismatic force of his personality as a leader cannot
be underestimated. And with the possible exception of Sek, he is probably the most tactically brilliant of all
Nadzybar’s commanders.”
“It almost sounds like you admire the bastard,” sniffed Sturm.
“I do not underestimate him, general,” Gaunt said coldly. “That is different.”
“And he could be here? It could be more than an enemy lie?” Anko asked, failing to disguise the wobble in his
voice.
“The Heritor fled Balhaut along with all the surviving warlords after Warmaster Slaydo slew the Archon. This
may be his first reappearance. The Zoican forces have encircled us well and swiftly, and they have used both waiting
and surprise to great effect. Both are tactics I know the Heritor favours. Furthermore, he delights in war machines.
With access to Ferrozoica hive’s fabricating plants, the baroque war machines we have seen are precisely the sort of
things I would expect him to send out at us.”
Croe said nothing as he took it in. “Suggestions? Gaunt?”
Astutely, Gaunt deferred to Kowle, aware of how the commissar was bristling at what he would no doubt see as
the colonel-commissar’s grandstanding. “I would invite Commissar Kowle’s ideas on how to deal with this
information.”
Kowle greedily accepted the scrap thrown to him. “We can’t shut out blanket broadcasts, so we must refute them.
All military, municipal and guilder institutions in Vervunhive, along with select representatives of the citizenry and
the Legislature, must be clearly and emphatically briefed that this is hollow propaganda. We should prepare
statements for the public address plates to repeat denials of this. I also urge we counter with broadcasts of our own.
Simple repeats of the statement ‘the Heritor is dead’ should suffice for now.”
“Begin the work. I want regular updates.” Croe waited as Kowle saluted and left, then faced Sturm and Xance.
“Battle standby remains in force, but I want all military resources moved into position now. No reserves. We must
meet the next thrust with absolute power.”
Both generals nodded.
“I trust the revisions you ordered to the communications net have been affected, General Sturm?”
“New channel settings and new codes have been issued to our forces. The confusions of the last storm should not
recur.”
Gaunt hoped Sturm was correct. He had reviewed the general’s revisions and they seemed sound, though they
favoured the Volpone Bluebloods and the Vervun Primary with the most accessible bands.
“Have you yet considered my proposal to engage them outside the Wall?” asked Xance.
“Impractical, general,” replied Croe.
“We saw how the Vervun Mechanised were destroyed in the grasslands,” Sturm added.
“But now they are dug in and restricted by the streets of the outer habs. The policy vouched by Nash, Grizmund
and Gaunt early on would seem more attractive now. The NorthCol and Narmenian armour could sally out with
infantry support and shake them from their forward line.”
Gaunt listened, fascinated. This was the first he had heard of Xance’s plan. Clearly Sturm, Anko and Croe had
made efforts to suppress it. It could not be coincidence that Xance was voicing it now in Gaunt’s presence.
“No!” barked Sturm, anger getting the better of him for a moment. “We will not dilute our resistance here by
wasting manpower and machines in an external raid.”
Xance shook his head and left the upper auditorium without saluting.
Sturm looked over at Gaunt with a scowl. “Don’t even begin to think about supporting Xance, Gaunt. The Imperial
Forces here at Vervunhive will not go on the offensive now or in the foreseeable future.”
Gaunt nodded, saluted and left. He knew when it was time to argue, and he’d been sticking his neck out more than
enough in the last few days.
The Zoicans recommenced sporadic bombardment at dusk, throwing shells and rockets up at the Curtain Wall at a
listless rate, more to annoy than to do any real damage. The Wall positions returned fire intermittently, whenever a
target was designated by the spotters.
Zoican ground forces, edging closer to the Wall, fired las — and bolt rounds at the gates from foxhole cover and
ditches. At Sondar Gate, Vervun Primary corps under Captain Cargin elevated the armoured domes of the electric
rotating turrets and peppered the ground in range outside with torrents of heavy autofire.
The new defences at Veyveyr Gate took their first battering. There was the punk! punk! of mortars dropping shells
close to the skirts of the stone siege walls and dirt clouds drifted back across the troops at the parapet.
Feygor swivelled his scope, hunting for a target in the hab waste beyond, and he quickly identified the rising
tendrils of smoke from the concealed mortars.
He ordered Bragg up to the wall-line and spotted for him as Bragg loaded rocket grenades into his shoulder
launcher. Then Feygor voxed to Rawne for permission to fire.
Rawne was crossing the inner trenches below the gate when he received the request and told Feygor to hold fire.
He hurried down a dugout towards the Volpone command section, a half-smashed rail carriage buried to the axles
in ash and rubble and shielded along its length with flak-board, sandbags and piled stone. Rawne had been ordered
to co-ordinate the defence with his Volpone opposite number, but despite Sturm’s communication review — or
because of it, Rawne grimly suspected — the inter-unit vox links seemed stilted and slow.
Two Bluebloods of the elite 10th Brigade stood guard at the gas-curtained entrance. They were giants in their
carapace battledress, the grey and gold of their segmented armaplas and fatigues spotless and austere. Each carried a
gleaming black hellgun with a sawn-off pump-gun attached to the bayonet lug under the main barrel.
They blocked his advance.
“Major Rawne, Tanith area commander,” he said briskly and they stood aside to let him enter.
Colonel Nikolaas Taschen DeHante Corday was a true Blueblood: massive, powerful and square-jawed with
hooded eyes. He was sitting at his chart desk in the carriage as Rawne entered and he looked the Tanith over like he
was something he’d found adhering to his boot.
Rawne nodded. “I wish to commence discriminate return of fire. There are mortars trying to range my positions.”
Corday looked at his chart again and then nodded. “Do you want support?”
“They’re simply harrying, biding their time. But I’d rather not sit my men there while they find their true range.”
“Is it worth drawing up the artillery?”
Rawne shook his head. “Not yet. Let me silence the mortars and see what they try next.”
“Very good.”
Rawne turned to leave.
“Major? Rawne, isn’t it?”
Rawne turned back to see that Corday had risen to his feet. “I am anxious that the Volpone and the Tanith can
complement each other in this position,” he said.
“I share your hope.”
“There is not a good record between our regiments.”
Rawne was surprised by the frankness.
“No. No, there isn’t. May I ask… do you know why?”
Corday sighed. “Voltemand. I was not part of that action, but I have reviewed the records. A miscalculation on
General Sturm’s part caused artillery to injure your units in the field.”
Rawne coughed gently. It was a polite and rather inaccurate appraisal, but he didn’t want to antagonise the
Blueblood officer.
“I don’t believe the Volpone have ever formally apologised to the Tanith for it. For what it’s worth, I make that
apology now.”
“Is there a reason?” Rawne asked guardedly.
“One of my men, Culcis, speaks highly of the Ghosts, of your Colonel Corbec in particular. He fought with them on
Nacedon. Others have praised Gaunt’s leadership on Monthax.” Corday smiled. The smile seemed genuine, despite
the aristocratic languor of the face. Rawne thought it would not be impossible to like Corday.
“Sturm, Emperor honour him… Gilbear… many of the upper echelon will of course despise the Tanith for
eternity!” They both laughed. “But you’ll find me a fair man, Rawne. We Bluebloods have prided ourselves on our
superiority for a long time. It is time we learned from others and realised that the Imperial Guard has other fine
regiments within it that we might be honoured and educated to serve alongside.”
Rawne was quietly astonished. Like all the Ghosts, he had come to loathe the Bluebloods, and for a damaged,
hating soul like Rawne that loathing came easy. He could never have believed he would hear such comradeship from
one of them, especially a senior officer.
“I appreciate your words, colonel. I will bear them in mind and circulate your thoughts amongst my own men. It’s
fair to say that unless we learn to fight together, we will die here. In the spirit of co-operation, may I note that our
inter-unit vox-links are still unreliable?”
Corday nodded and made a note on his data-slate with a stylus. “Select band pi as a working link, with band
kappa as reserve. I think I’ll send one of my subalterns with a vox-set to work as liaison. I suggest you reciprocate.”
Rawne nodded, saluted and left the carriage.
Corday called his bodyguard in to join him. “Send Graven to the Tanith position with a vox-set.
Tell him to act as intermediary. I want these disgusting Ghost scum kept sweet, make that clear to him. We don’t
want them hanging our arses out to dry when the fighting starts.”
Returning down the trench, Rawne sent a confirmation to Feygor at the leading wall. Bragg’s launcher thumped and
the mortar position erupted in a sheet of flame and debris as its munitions were hit.
After a while, las-fire began to pepper back from the Zoican lines. The Ghosts kept their heads down and waited.
At Hass East Fort, overlooking the estuary inlet, it was deathly quiet. Hass East had been spared all the fighting so
far, but the position was still vital, as it watched the Vannick Highway and guarded the Ontabi Gate entrance to the
hive, the only one of the five great city gates not yet assaulted.
On the high top of the tower, Sergeant Varl gazed out across the dusk settling on the reed-beds and islets of the
matt-grey river. Waders and flycatchers darted and warbled over the water and rushes, and the riverside air was
crazy with billowing gnats. The great bulk of the Hiraldi road-bridge to the north was just a silhouette.
The rain had eased off. There was a smell of thunder in the air. Varl, with two platoons of Tanith, was sharing
defence of the Fort with three platoons of Roane Deepers under Captain Willard, and three hundred Vervun Primary
gunners and wall artillerymen answering to Major Rodyin, a junior member of one of the lesser noble houses.
Varl got on with Willard. The Roane was about twenty-five, tanned and shaggy blond, with penetrating, brown
eyes and an earthy sense of humour. Like Varl, Willard had a metallic implant— in his case, the fingers and palm of
his right hand. They joked together about their experiences of body automation.
Rodyin was rather more difficult. Although they all faced death here, Rodyin had a more personal stake because
this was his home. He was pale, earnest and prematurely balding, though he was only in his early twenties. He
seemed utterly mystified by the jokes and quips that rattled freely between his two fellow officers, and he would
stare at them myopically though the half-moon glasses that were permanently perched on the bridge of his nose. Varl
understood that House Rodyin was one of the liberal families in the hive, more humanitarian and forward-thinking
than the old noble houses or the guilders. House Rodyin’s fortunes were built on food sources and their harvestermachines
grazed the great pastoral uplands north of the Hass, gathering grain for the vast granaries in the dock
district.
Varl liked Rodyin, but he didn’t seem much of a soldier.
The Tanith sergeant crossed the tower top, slapping gnats off his skin, and toured the emplacements as the daylight
faded.
He heard laughter and saw Willard and some of his tan-uniformed troops joking by a rocket station. Rodyin stood
a little apart, scoping the river and the road with a high-power set of magnoculars.
Willard greeted Varl. “But for these bloody flies, Ghost, I’d say we’ve pulled the best duty here! None of that
bloody fighting stuff up here at Hass East, eh?”
Varl had already seen fighting in Vervunhive and was actually glad of the calm and quiet up here on the far eastern
side of the city. But still, waiting was sometimes the mind-killer. “Wouldn’t object to a few Zoicans to pop though,”
he grinned.
“Hell, no! A few of those bloody yellows to keep my eye in, eh?”
More laughter. Varl saw how Rodyin shifted uncomfortably, unwilling to be drawn in. The major took his duties
and his war seriously — too seriously in Varl’s opinion — probably because he’d never been in one before.
“See anything?” Varl asked, joining Rodyin at the parapet.
“A little river traffic. Barges, ferries. Most of them are crossing from the north bank with munition hauls. House
Command has embargoed all but vital supply runs.”
Varl took his own single-lens scope from his pack and scanned the area. To the north of their position, near the
bridge, sat the bulky promethium tanks of the dockside fuel depot, the main facility serving Vervunhive. On stilt legs,
pipelines tracked away to the north and east, as far into the distance as Varl could see. They’d once pumped the fuel
in from Vannick Hive, before it was lost. Now the only liquid fuel supplies available to Vervunhive were coming
from NorthCol.
“Looks quiet enough,” Varl said.
Behind them, Willard finished a particularly coarse joke and the laughter of his men echoed down the battlements
into the deepening gloom.
Guilder Worlin returned to his guild house at nightfall. He was grinning broadly and his face was shiny with the glow
of too much joiliq. An extraordinary guild meeting conducted in an armoured bunker under the Commercia had left
his personal resources three times the size they had been that dawn. The considerable promethium reserves he had to
bargain with had been snapped up greedily in a bidding war between five major guild cadres, and he’d also
managed to draw up a resourcing agreement with representatives of Vervun Primary. His pipeline was still drawing
fuel into the massive steel bowsers in the Worlin commercial estates on the river. Vannick Hive might be dead, but
its legacy lingered on and Worlin was amassing a trade fortune with every drop of it. By the time the war was over,
Worlin was assured of a place in the high circle of the Commercia guilds. House Worlin would affect a promotion to
the senior echelon of hive trade institutions. Its stock price alone had quadrupled since the First Storm.
He sat in his private office, at a teak-topped desk with built-in pict-plates, and sipped an overfilled glass of joiliq
as he reviewed the messages his communicator had collected during the day.
One stopped him in his tracks. It was a notification of enquiry from some nobody called Curth at Inner Hab
Collective Medical Hall 67/mv. It wanted to know his whereabouts on the first day of attack. Had he been anywhere
near Carriage Station C7/d? There were irregularities that demanded investigation and they were taking statements
from anybody who had been in the area at that time. Monitor viewers along the access ramp had recorded him and
two of his houseguard crossing that way during the bombardment of the Commercia. The message was signed “Curth,
A.” and copied to an off-worlder medic named Dorden, one of the Imperial Guard.
Worlin realised his hand was shaking and he was slopping joiliq out of the glass. He set it down and sucked the
drops off the ball of his thumb.
He checked his weapon was still in the drawer of the desk. This annoyance would need to be dealt with quickly.
The chatter was now so persistent that there was no other sign or meaning to the world. Salvador Sondar spasmed
gently in his fluid world, gnawing at his lips. The voice of his worthy Ferrozoican cousin Clatch had been whittled
away until it simply repeated two words, over and again. A name. A daemonic name.
Sondar was emaciated and weak with hunger. His feeder tubes had long since run dry and he had not the presence
of mind to cycle the automated systems to refresh them. Even his meat puppets were forgotten and slowly rotting as
they dangled lifelessly from their strings.
A rich smell of decay filled the High Master’s chambers.
He was oblivious.
He knew what the chatter wanted. The notion appealed to him, because the chatter made it so appealing.
He couldn’t form a coherent thought. He simply listened. Perhaps he would do it… just to shut the chatter up. Any
time now.
Larkin had been perfectly still for over an hour. His eye never left the scope-sight. The Spoil-head manufactory
around him was quiet and dark, but he was aware of the Vervun sniper Lotin crouched behind rubble further down
the second-storey room.
Ten minutes before, Larkin had sensed movement down on the Spoil. He’d watched for it again and now he saw it:
a brief flash of moonlight on armour.
He retrained his aim. Breathed.
The Zoicans were advancing up the Spoil. They were well-drilled and as stealthy as any practised insurgency
team. It was clear they had either switched their distinctive ochre armour for dull, night-fighting kit or had covered
the livid yellow with soot.
He signalled his intelligence to Mkoll over the vox link, using only half a dozen code words.
Mkoll ordered the Tanith snipers to address and fire when they had a target. A second later, Ormon delivered the
same command to his own men.
Larkin saw movement again, clearly in the foggy, green glow of his scope.
He breathed, squared and fired.
The stinging red pulse whipped down the ore slope and a black-clad figure was thrown up and backwards.
Larkin immediately dipped under the edge of the rubble and took a new position. He was certain his muzzle flash
had been discreet, but there was no sense in advertising. He made his new vantage and aimed again, his extended
barrel hidden inside a broken drain-gutter.
Lotin, ten metres away, fired. His lasgun made a loud crack and even from where he was, Larkin saw the muzzle
flash and cursed.
He heard Lotin complain over the vox-link. He’d missed.
Move, move and re-aim! Larkin willed silently.
Lotin fired again. His whoop of success was quickly cut short by a perfectly aimed las-round from the Spoil
below. The Zoicans had been watching for a repeat flash.
Lotin toppled back and slumped into the rubble scree on the floor, his face gone.
So, thought Larkin, they have capable and careful snipers too.
This war just got interesting.
The night was on them now and the moons, two large and cream and one tiny and livid red, climbed slowly into a
purple sky. Rain clouds, black and woolly, chased along the eastern skyline. Distant thunder rolled out in the
grasslands.
The air was sultry and unseasonable, and at Hass East Fort, Varl was sweating freely into his black fatigues. The
discomfort was made worse by the static build-up generated by the vast Shield behind them, fizzing and crackling in
the dark, a glowing hemisphere of energy.
The plating of his lasgun and his bionic arm tingled with electricity. Varl yearned for the threatening storm to break
over them and clear the stifling air.
There was a brutal flash from the north-east and then an ear-splitting bang, followed by an impact that threw Varl
off his feet. Voices were shouting in the night, alarms were ringing and someone was screaming in agony.
The sky lit up again. Explosions were rippling along the entire stretch of Curtain Wall between Ontabi Gate and
the Hass.
Varl got up, blinking. There was no sign of shelling. That had been… mines.
He ran down the parapet, yelling into his vox-link as more explosions shook the wall. Detonating mines meant one
thing only: the enemy was right on top of them, close enough to set charges.
Men were milling all around, confused. Equally useless barks of vox-traffic answered Varl. Varl grabbed the wall
for support as another explosion went off close by, flame slicking upwards in a tight ball inside the Wall.
Inside the Wall?
“They’ve penetrated! They’ve penetrated!” he bellowed, not understanding it but desperate to get the message out.
Almost at once, he came under fire. Las-shots flicked the air around him, coming up from the nearest Wall access
stair.
Varl returned fire, rallying the Vervun Primary troops nearest to him. Crackling autoguns began to support him. He
saw Zoican storm-troops spreading out onto the battlements from the stair access, their ochre armour dulled by dark,
tarry stains.
Varl shot down one or two before realising many more were storming the battlement behind him too. How in the
name of feth had they got inside?
A huge blast shook him to his knees. An entire section of Hass East collapsed with a roar and brick dust billowed
into the sky, underlit by flame. Further detonations sliced through the top of the wall.
Varl saw gun emplacements ripped apart and exploded and he watched as entire sections of wall-defences blew
outwards as mines set off ammunition silos and autoloader hoppers.
Like the wrath of a ruthless god, the war had come to Hass East at last.
TWELVE
DARKNESS FALLS
“What is the strongest weapon of mankind? The god-machines of the Adeptus Mechanicus? No! The Astartes
Legions? No! The tank? The lasgun? The fist? No to all! Courage and courage alone stands above them all!”
—Macharius, Lord Solar, from his writings
Distant thunder woke Ibram Gaunt from a dreamless sleep.
His bedroom, part of a small suite of rooms disposed to him, adjacent to House Command, was dark except for
the dull amber glow of rune sigils on the small codifier by the desk.
He turned on the lamp and slid off the bed where he had lain down only a couple of hours before, fully clothed.
Sleep had overtaken him in an instant.
By the light of the lamp, he crossed to the desk, where stacks of ribbon-bound papers and dataslates were piled
up. He took a sip of last night’s wine from a glass on a side table.
The thunder came again. Somewhere, deadened by the thick walls, an alarm was ringing.
He activated the call stud of the intercom set into the marble facing of the wall, blankly regarding the great framed
portrait over the bare grate opposite. Its thick, time-darkened oils portrayed a pompous-looking man in the Vervun
Primary uniform of an older age, bedraggled with braid, one foot raised to rest on a pile of human skulls, a scroll in
one hand and a power-sword in the other.
“Sir?”
“What’s going on?”
“Reports of a raid at Ontabi Gate. We’re waiting for confirmation.”
“Appraise me swiftly. I have men at Hass East.”
“Of course, sir. There is… a visitor for you.”
Gaunt checked the clock. It was nearly two in the morning. “Who?”
“He bears the Imperial seal and says you requested him.”
Gaunt sighed and said, “Allow him in.”
The suite’s outer door slid open and Gaunt went into the sitting room to meet his visitor, activating the wall lamps.
A gnarled, elderly man in long, purple robes shuffled in, peering at Gaunt through thick-lensed spectacles. His
hair, where it protruded from under his high-crested, red, felt cap, was grey and unruly, and he leaned on an ebony
cane. Behind him came a tall, pale young man in grey cleric’s coat, laden down with old tomes and sheaves of paper.
“Commissar… Gaunt?” the old man wheezed, studying the officer before him.
“Colonel-commissar, actually. You are?”
“Advocate Cornelius Pater of the Administratum Judiciary. Your request for legal assistance was received this
night and Intendant Banefail directed me to attend you with all urgency.”
“I thank the intendant for his alacrity and you for your time.”
The advocate nodded and wheezed his way over to a leather couch, leaving his assistant in the doorway, swaying
under the weight of the manuscripts and volumes he carried.
“Set them down on the table,” Gaunt told him. “You are?”
The man seemed wary of speaking.
“My clerk, Bwelt,” Pater answered for him. “He will not speak. He is training for junior advocacy and must
perforce learn the protocols of question and address. Besides, he knows nothing.”
“How do we undertake this?” Gaunt asked the advocate.
Pater cleared his throat. “You will review the matter for my benefit — excluding no detail —you will show me
any pertinent transcripts and you will furnish me with a glass of fortified wine.”
Gaunt glanced round at Bwelt. “There’s a bottle on the side table in the bedroom. Fetch him a glass.”
Pater refused to speak further until the crystal glass was in his withered hand and the first sip in his mouth. The
cane lay across his lap.
Gaunt began. “An Imperial Guard General — Grizmund of the Narmenian Armour — and four of his staff officers
are charged with insubordination. They’re being held in the VPHC stockade, pending prosecution by a VPHC court.
The charges are spurious. I want them freed and back to duty immediately. I think the matter founders on a formality
— the VPHC cannot prosecute Imperial Guard personnel. If there is a crime to answer, it is an Imperial
Commissariat matter. I am the highest representative of that authority on Verghast.”
Pater adjusted his spectacles and studied the data-slate Gaunt handed him.
“Hmm… clear-cut enough, I suppose. You’re citing Imperial Commissariat Edict 4368b. The VPHC won’t like it.
Tarrian, in particular, will hate you for it.”
“There’s no love lost between us.”
“Bwelt? What is it? You gurn like a fool or a man with chronic gas.”
“It’s 4378b, Advocate. The edict is 4378b.” Bwelt’s voice was almost a whisper.
“Just so,” Pater said, brushing off the correction and returning his gaze to the slate. “It may come to court. Tarrian
has a miserable record of dragging cases through all the due processes, even if he is bound to lose. To him, there’s
some satisfaction in prolonging the agony.”
“I want it thrown out before then. We can’t be without Grizmund any longer. In the next few days, Vervunhive’s
future may depend upon skilled armour.”
Tricky. But the edict is well-precedented. A brief hearing, perhaps at dawn tomorrow, and we should be able to
pull the rug out from under the VPHC Pater looked up at Gaunt. “I’ll derive satisfaction from that. The VPHC have
deemed themselves above Imperial Law for many years. It’s been nigh on impossible to practise clean law in the
hive. With your prestige involved, we can win.”
“Good. At least we know the VPHC can’t act before then. However they argue it, they know an Imperial
Commissar must be present for a tribunal to be conducted.”
“Indeed. Even if they press for a court of their own, we can stall them as long as you refuse to participate. Then —
Bwelt? Again, you screw up your face! What now?”
Bwelt paused and seemed to choose every word with great care. “The… tribunal is in session now, advocate. You
told me to collate all information relating to this case before we came here and that fact was diarised in the judiciary
case-roll.”
“What?”
“Th-they are proceeding… because they have an Imperial commissar present. Commissar Kowle has agreed to
represent the Imperial interests and—”
Gaunt’s vicious curse shut Bwelt up and made the old man start. Pulling on his jacket, cap and weapon belt, Gaunt
reeled off a colourful and descriptive tirade outlining what he would do to Tarrian, Kowle and the entire VPHC in
four-letter words.
“Come with me! Now!” he told the advocate and his trembling clerk, then flew out of the room.
At the eastern edge of the hive, the sky was on fire. From the outer dark of the river bend, enemy shelling had
begun to hammer at the damage done to the adamantine Curtain Wall and the ramparts of Mass East Fort by the
mines.
Varl stumbled through the firestorm, trying to regroup his men and get them down into the deep-wall bunkers.
Zoican assaulters were everywhere. The defenders couldn’t fight this. Varl tried to vox House Command or Tanith
control, but the energy flare of the bombardment had scrambled the communication bands.
He got maybe twenty men around him, mostly Ghosts but some Roane and Vervun Primary, and ran them down the
tower steps into the bowels of the fort. The stone walls were sweating as the heat of the burning levels above
leeched into them. Plaster facings shrivelled and wilted, and the air was oven-hot and hurt the soldiers’ lungs. At one
point, a shell-fall punched through the corridor twenty metres behind them and passed on through the opposite wall,
slicing stone so it dribbled like heated butter. The superheated air that slammed down the hall from the impart
flattened them. They met groups of Zoicans and Varl’s men cut them apart.
Two levels down, they ran into a stream of nearly sixty Vervun Primary and Roane Deepers with Major Rodyin
amongst them. Several had bad burns.
“Where’s Willard?” screamed Varl over the klaxons and the explosive hurricane roar.
“Haven’t seen him!” barked Rodyin. One lens of his spectacles was crazed and he had a cut on his cheek.
“We have to get the men down! Down lower!” Varl yelled and the two officers began routing the surviving troops
down a back staircase as firestorms billowed down the hallways towards them.
“They mined the Curtain Wall! From inside!” Rodyin bellowed as he and Varl pushed man after man past them
onto the stairs.
“I know, feth it! How the hell did they get in?”
Rodyin didn’t answer.
On a section of wall below the mauled fort, Corporal Meryn was leading a straggle of panicking troops to cover.
Two squads of Ghosts — Brostin, Ixjgris, Nehn and Mkteeg amongst them —pushed forward past him, but there
were twenty or more Vervun Primary soldiers stumbling in their wake. Meryn bawled at them, waving his arms,
trying to be heard above the shriek of the shelling and the detonations all around. Flames from the fort were reaching
a hundred metres into the sky and billows of soot and burning fabric squalled around them. The heat was
overwhelming. Somewhere close, a loader full of ammo had caught fire and heated rounds were firing off wildly,
spanking off the stonework and cutting zigzag tracer paths in the air.
A shot hit the Vervun Primary trooper nearest to Meryn and exploded his spiked helmet.
There was a flash and some vast cutting beam drawn up outside the Wall swept over them. Meryn saw it and
threw himself flat as the inexorable beam raked the parapet at chest height, vaporising the hurrying line of Vervun
troopers in a murderous sequence. They simply vanished in turn, obliterated, leaving nothing but clouds of steam and
the occasional smouldering boot behind.
The beam swept right over the prone Tanith Corporal, searing the back of his breeches, jacket and head-hair right
off. He winced at the low throb of superficial burns, but he was startled to be alive.
He got to his feet, his black fatigues shredded and falling off his body, and stumbled to the nearest stairhead.
Hundreds of men — Tanith, Roane and Vervun Primary — fled the Wall fortifications and Ontabi Gate and ran for
cover in the streets and habs adjacent to the docks. Enemy shelling and beam-fire were punching clean through the
Wall and the fort structure now and blasting into the edges of the worker habs. The Shield, ignited above them,
mocked the scene. What good was an energy screen when the enemy was blasting through ceramite and adamantium?
Stretches of the habs were engulfed in flame and thousands of hab-dwellers filled the streets in panic, mingling
with the fleeing soldiery, choking the access routes and transits in a panicked stampede. Hass East Fort convulsed
and collapsed volcanically, the great hatches of Ontabi Gate melting like ice. A breach had been cut in the Curtain
Wall of Vervunhive more terrible and more extensive than any damage done so far, even than at the brutalised
Veyveyr Railhead.
At Croe Gate, the next main fortification down the Curtain Wall from Hass East, some ten kilometres south of Ontabi,
the wall troops and observers watched in incredulous horror as beams of destruction and heavy shelling punished the
riverside defences. A plume of fire underlit the storm clouds and blazed up into the sky like a rising sun.
General Nash was at Croe Gate still and he dismally voxed the situation to House Command. He urgently
requested significant reinforcements to his position. In the wake of a major breach like this, ground forces couldn’t
be far behind.
As if on cue, one of his spotters reported movement on the Vannick Highway, twenty kilometres north-east. Nash
used his magnoculars on heat-see and gazed out at the shimmering, green phantoms of tanks and armoured vehicles,
thousands of them, roaming towards Ontabi in a spearhead formation.
“I have contacts! Repeat, I have contacts! At least a thousand mechanised armour units advancing down the
Vannick Highway and the surrounding hinterlands! They’ll be on top of Hass East in under an hour! Reinforce my
position now! I need armour! Lots of bloody armour! House Command! Do you respond? Do you bloody respond?”
An almost eerie silence fell across the main auditorium of House Command. Only the desperate chatter of vox-traffic
could be heard, reeling out reports of fearful destruction from a thousand different locations.
His face pinched and pale, Marshal Croe looked down at the chart table on the upper level. Hass East was gone.
A mass armour force was approaching from the eastern levels. Artillery was beginning to pound Croe Gate and the
eastern wall circuit. Zoican troops were assaulting the Spoil and the defences at Veyveyr. Heavy tanks and infantry
columns were hitting Sondar Gate and the wall stretches towards Hass Gate and Hass West Fort. Hass West Fort
itself was receiving ferocious ranged shelling.
An attack on all fronts. The defences of Vervunhive were already at full stretch and Croe knew this was only the
beginning.
“What — what do we do?” stammered Anko, his face as white as his dress uniform. “Marshal? Marshal Croe?
What do we do, Croe? Speak, you bastard!”
Croe struck Anko across his fat mouth and sent him whimpering to the ironwork floor. Croe looked across at
Sturm. “Your thoughts, general?” There was venom and ice in equal parts in Croe’s voice.
“I…” Sturm began. He faltered.
“Don’t even begin to suggest an evacuation, Sturm, or I’ll kill you where you stand. Evacuation is not an option.
You were sent here to defend Vervunhive, and that’s what you’ll do.” He handed Sturm his ducal signet. “Go to the
stockade. Take troops with you. Release Grizmund and set him to command the armour before its strength is wasted.
If that bastard Tarrian or any VPHC resists, deal with them. I expect you back at Veyveyr Gate to assume command
there as soon as Grizmund is free. We have spent too much time arguing amongst ourselves. Vervunhive lives or dies
tonight.”
Sturm nodded stiffly and took the ring. “Where will you be, marshal?”
“I will take personal command of Sondar Gate. The hive will not die while I yet live.”
The shutter hatch of the stockade remained resolutely shut. Gaunt hammered on it with the butt of his bolt pistol, but
there was no response. Gaunt, Pater and Bwelt stood pinioned by the floodlights, locked out in the damp cold of
Level Sub-40. Captain Daur was with them, bleary and pale with sleep. Gaunt had dragged the liaison officer from
his quarters on his way down to the stockade.
Gaunt turned to the advocate, who was wheezing for breath and leaning on his cane after the exertions of the
frantic journey down into the bottom of the Spine. “Don’t you have an override, an authorisation?”
Pater held up his badge of office. “Administratum pass level magenta… but the VPHC are a law to themselves.
They have their own lock codes. Besides, colonel-commissar, do you see a keyhole?”
Gaunt pulled off his leather coat and threw it to Bwelt. “Hold that,” he said bluntly and swung out his chainsword.
The weapon whined as he cycled it up to full power.
He stabbed it at the armoured shutter. It rode aside, shrieking, leaving scratch marks and sending broken saw-teeth
away in a flurry of sparks. He dug again and sliced into the metal, cutting a jagged slot a few centimetres across
before the sword meshed and over-revved. With the sheer force of his upper arms and his shoulders, Gaunt heaved
down, snarling a curse out at the top of his lungs, tearing down another few centimetres.
“Sir?” Daur said sharply behind him.
Gaunt spun around, raising the chainsword, in time to see the armoured lift cage descend and clank to rest. The
grill-doors squealed open. General Sturm, flanked by Colonel Gilbear and ten Blueblood stormtroops, emerged from
the lift car.
“Sturm, don’t make this worse by—”
“Oh, shut up, you stupid fool, and put that weapon away,” snapped Sturm. He and his men approached and
surrounded the quartet at the shutter. Gilbear was oozing a dreadfully superior smile at Gaunt.
“Get him out of my face, Sturm, or I’ll practise what I’m doing to the door on him.”
Gilbear raised his hellgun, but Sturm slapped it aside. “You know, Gaunt,” Sturm said, “I almost respect you. I
could do with a few men of your passion in my regiment. But still and all, you are a benighted fool and beneath the
contempt of civilised men. You’ve spent too much time with those Tanith savages and— what are you doing, you old
fool?”
This last remark was directed at Pater, who was carefully and quietly dictating material for Bwelt to set down on
his slate.
“Transcribing your words, general, in case the colonel-commissar wishes to press a slander action against you
later on.” The old advocate’s voice was utterly empty of expression or nuance: a true lawyer. Gaunt laughed out
loud.
Sturm looked away from the old man. He held up Croe’s ducal signet. “If you want to get inside, you need one of
these.” He pressed it against the centre of the shutter. There was a dull thunk, a noise of servos churning and the
shutter, with its chainsword tear, rose.
The group entered and Sturm opened the inner shutter. They passed on into the sodium-lit inner hall of the
stockade.
“Marshal Croe has ordered me to release Grizmund. The world is going all to hell above our heads, Gaunt. Zoica
assaults on all fronts. It is time to forget all petty bickering.”
Three VPHC troopers ran forward to confront them. One started to ask what they were doing in the stockade.
Gilbear and his pointman cut them down with loose, brutal shots.
Gaunt pushed forward past the bodies and kicked open a set of wooden double doors to the left of the inner
concourse.
There was a large circular chamber beyond, lit by bracketed wall-lamps with glass chimneys. Grizmund and his
officers, hands tied behind their backs and hoods over their heads, stood on a raised dais under spotlights in the
centre of the room. Kowle, Tarrian and nine senior VPHC officers sat on a tiered rank of wooden stalls before them,
and a dozen VPHC troops with riot-guns lined the walls.
“What the gak is this?” Tarrian roared, getting to his feet.
Sturm held up the ducal signet. “By order of the marshal himself, this court is overthrown. The prisoners will be
freed.”
Kowle rose too. “The meeting is in session and obeys the edicts of both planetary and Imperial law. We—”
“Shut your damn face, Kowle!” snapped Gaunt. “The hive is dying above us and you waste your time persecuting
good, honest men for the sake of some political point-scoring. You have no idea what real war is, do you, you
bastard? You didn’t on Balhaut and you don’t here!”
Kowle’s face went purple with rage, but the furious Tarrian pushed him aside. “Interference with VPHC
proceedings is a capital offence, Gaunt! Your maverick actions won’t get you anywhere except to the sharp end of a
firing squad detail!”
“Actually, that’s not correct,” said Bwelt firmly. “Imperial Edict 95674, sub-clause 45, states that an Imperial
judicial officer, such as a full commissar, may interrupt and foreclose any planetary legal affair without restraint or
penalty.”
“You tell him, boy!” cackled Pater.
Gaunt stared at Tarrian. “Don’t push them, Tarrian.”
“Who?”
“Gilbear and the other Bluebloods. Sturm can’t control them and I sure as feth can’t either. From me, you’ll get
tough honesty. From them, you’ll get a hell-round between the eyes.” Even as he spat the words, Gaunt felt them all
crossing an almost imperceptible line. The line between a precarious confrontation and total mayhem.
“Gak you, you wretched off-world scum!” bawled Tarrian as he pulled his autopistol from its holster. Gilbear
dropped him with a shot to the chest. Tarrian’s body exploded out through the back of the wooden seating.
The VPHC guards surged forward, racking riot-guns and firing. Gaunt saw a Blueblood fly backwards, hit in the
shoulder. Sturm was cursing and blasting with his regimental service pistol. The Bluebloods opened up and sprayed
the room.
Grizmund and his officers, blind under their hoods, dropped to the floor in terror. Gaunt wrestled the gasping
advocate and his stunned clerk to the ground out of harm’s way. Daur’s laspistol cracked repeatedly.
Point-blank, in the tight confines of the court chamber, Volpone met VPHC head on, hellgun against riot-gun, filling
the air with smoke, blood-mist and death.
Salvador Sondar slumped. A dribble of blood-bubbles fluttered from his ear towards the roof of the tank. He gave
in. The chatter filled him, eating into his flesh, his blood, his marrow, his mind.
He did what it told him to do.
He deactivated the Shield.
THIRTEEN
THE HARROWING
“Never.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, on being asked under what circumstances he would signal surrender
There was a loud, subsonic bang of pressure as the great Shield collapsed.
Windows blew out all across the hive. The ambient temperature dropped by six whole degrees as the insulation of
the energy dome vanished and the cold of the Verghast night swept in. The vortex of collapsing air whisked up the
vast smoke banks collected around the Curtain Wall and blew them into the hive itself like acrid fog. Disconnected
energies crackled up out of the great pylon and the anchor stations and burned themselves out ferociously in the
blackness.
A shuddering and terrifying noise drove in across Vervunhive. It was the unified howl of triumph from the millions
of Zoicans outside.
Marshal Croe, majestic in his robes and armour, had just reached Sondar Gate with his staff retinue, and he
stopped in his tracks, gazing up incredulously into the cold dark. His first thought was mechanical failure or even
sabotage, but the Shield generators were the most securely guarded installations in the hive, and he had expressly
ordered work-teams to inspect them every hour.
This was unthinkable. Inside the ceramite of his freshly donned war armour, Croe felt his heart grow as cold as the
night around him. The ungifted powersword of Heironymo Sondar, most valued of all the hive’s war-icons, felt
heavy and useless in his hand. He caught himself and glanced around. The bannerpoles of his colour-sergeants
drooped and fluttered dismally about him.
“Lord marshal?” whispered his adjutant, Major Otte.
“We…” Croe began, his mind racing, frantic but empty. He was torn. He wanted to return to the Main Spine at
once and cut to the root of this disaster, get the Shield back on. It was Sondar, he felt it in his blood. That bastard
Salvador had finally gone over the edge.
But the immediate fight was here at the hive wall, in the face of the massing foe. His men had seen his arrival and
if he turned around now, just as he had arrived, it would destroy their morale.
The silence that had followed the ghastly massed howl of the Zoicans outside, a silence that in truth could only
have lasted a few seconds, was lost abruptly as the ear-splitting bombardment resumed. For leagues, the sky behind
the towering shadow of the Curtain Wall that rose above him was lit yellow by the flare of colossal assault. Croe
saw a section of turret to the west of the gate explode and collapse down into the Square of Marshals in a shower of
sparks and rubble.
He took the tower steps two at a time at the head of his retinue, blazing the sacred sword into life, raging out
orders to both the men around him and those unseen on the wall-top via his microbead link.
One of those orders, direct and succinct, coded in House Croe battle language, was for the ears of Izak, Croe’s
personal bodyguard. The big house warrior, clad in maroon body-armour, faltered at the foot of the tower steps and
then turned back, curtly acknowledging his lord’s command. He ran back across the square to the armoured stafftrack
that had brought Croe to Sondar Gate, and he steered it away at full throttle towards the Main Spine.
Alarms and klaxons began to whoop and wail once again. In the refuges and the camps of the Commercia and the
other open spaces of the hive, the multitude seethed in panic. They’d seen the Shield fail. They’d fought their way to
the security of the hive and now that too was gone.
Stampeding in places, two and a half million refugees began to surge north towards the river, the deluge of their
bodies choking the streets. Their vast numbers were quickly swelled by inner hab citizens, worker families and low
guilders, who had all, in a brief few seconds, seen their protection from Zoica disappear. In a matter of minutes, the
hive was haemorrhaging people, rivers of panicking, screaming civilians, heading in hordes to a river they couldn’t
hope to cross.
Lord Heymlik Chass looked up from his scriptorium and gazed out of the ogee window. The stylus dropped from his
trembling fingers and made a blot of violet ink on the pages of his journal. He got up, his ornamental chair tumbling
over onto its back, and he stumbled across to the window, pressing his hands against the lead glass.
“Oh, Salvador,” he said, tears in his eyes, “what have you done?”
His daughter burst into the room, still dressed in her nightgown, her terrified maids trying to wrap a velvet robe
around her. Outside in the hall. House Chass lifeguards were shouting and running to and fro. Lord Chass turned and
saw the look of jolted fear and bewilderment in his daughter’s eyes.
He took her in his arms.
“The alarms woke me, father. What—”
“Hush. You will be all right, Merity.” He stroked her hair, holding her head tight to his chest.
“Handmaids?”
The women barely curtsied. They were terrified and half-dressed themselves.
“Take my daughter to Shelter aa/6. Do it now.”
“The chamberlain is preparing the house shelter, lord,” said Maid Wholt.
“Forget the house shelter! Escort her now to aa/6 in the sub-levels!”
“A municipal bunker, lord?” gasped Maid Francer.
“Are you both deaf and stupid? The sublevels! Now!”
The maids scurried around, pulling at Merity. She clung on to her father. She was crying so much she couldn’t
speak.
“Go, daughter of Chass. Go now. I will follow shortly. I beg you, go!”
The maids managed to drag the sobbing girl out of the chamber and away towards the Spine elevators.
“Rudrec!” At Lord Chass’ shout, the chief lifeguard appeared in the doorway. He was still buttoning on his ornate
body-armour. His weapon was armed and unshrouded. He bowed.
Lord Chass handed him a small, silk satchel. “Go with my daughter. See she is brought safe to the municipal
shelter. No other will do — no other is deep enough. Take this for her: a few private family items. Make sure she
gets them.”
Rudrec tucked the satchel inside the body of his flak-mail hauberk. “It is my duty to escort you too, lord, I—”
“You are a good man, Rudrec. You have served this house well. Serve it again by doing as I order.”
Rudrec paused, his eyes meeting his lord’s directly for the first and last time in his life.
“Go!”
Alone now, the hall outside thundering with footsteps and voices, Chass put on his ceremonial robes, his bicorn
hat, his shot-silk gloves. He was shaking, but most of that was rage. He put his ducal seal in his coat pocket, pushed
the heavy code-signet ring onto his gloved finger, and slid a compact, single-shot bolt pistol with inlaid grips into his
gown’s inner sleeve. A handful of shells followed it.
Chass strode out into the corridor, stopping three of his lifeguards short. They saluted uncertainly.
“Come with me,” he told them.
Less than five minutes after the Shield vanished, the first Zoican shells began to wound the inner hive. It was as if
their artillery, their Earthshakers, their siege mortars, their missile positions had all been ranged ready, waiting.
Wave after wave of shrieking missiles screamed in over the Curtain Wall and hit the central district. Concussive
ripples of explosions blew out along block after block, closing arterial routes with rubble, setting fires that blazed
through dozens of high-rise habitat structures. Thousands of habbers, either sheltering in their homes or fleeing
through the streets, were obliterated or left crippled and helpless.
Siege mortar shells wailed in across Sondar Gate and punctured the stone concourse of the Square of Marshals.
Flagstone sections, whizzing like blades, were flung out, decapitating or mashing wall troopers from behind. The
distinguished lines of statues edging the square were toppled by the blasts or disintegrated outright.
Mass shelling pounded the manufactories alongside Croe Gate. Swathes of machine shops and warehousing caught
fire, and the flames established a firm hold, licking west into the worker habs. Similar shelling, supported by
ground-to-ground rockets, began to systematically hammer the habs and manufactories behind Hass West, and the
impacts of their fall crept north into the elite sector. Guild holdings and house ordinary estates were flattened and
torn apart.
The shelling and the dreadful cutting beams searing Hass East scored a hole a hundred metres wide where the
Curtain Wall and the Ontabi Gate had once stood, and as the beams redirected towards the inner habs and the upper
stretches of the Curtain, the Zoican armoured column and massed infantry along the Vannick Highway pressed in
through the breach. The Zoican land forces made their first entry into Vervunhive proper thirteen minutes after the
Shield came down, though the insurgent forces encountered by Sergeant Varl were, by then, well inside the hive.
Long-range shells — some two thousand kilos apiece, launched from railcars drawn up on hasty, makeshift
trackways out in the southern grasslands — whistled and whooped as they dropped on the Commercia and the
mercantile suburbs. Barter-houses blew out, their rich canopies igniting in sheets of flame as hot as the heart of a
star. Shockwaves crumpled others and the massive shells dug vast craters in the rockcrete footing of the hive.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees were still pressing to leave the commercial spaces. Most died in the firestorms or
were instantly obliterated by the shelling. Some of the craters were five hundred metres across.
Shelling and missile attacks began to hit the vast Main Spine itself. In hundreds of places, the adamantine skin of
the city-peak ruptured and holed. Fires burned unchecked through nine or more levels. House Nompherenti, on Level
68, took a direct hit from a massive incendiary rocket and the entire noble lineage was immolated. They died
frenzied, tortured deaths amid the furnace of tapestries, furniture and drapes in their exalted court. Lord Nompherenti
himself, ablaze from head to foot, ran screaming for a hundred paces and toppled from the raised balcony of his
banquet hall. His burning body, streaming a trail of fire like a comet, plunged fifteen hundred metres down onto the
roofs of the central district.
General Xance, with a tattered vanguard of seven hundred NorthCol troops, was pushing through the firestorm
chaos west of Croe Gate when pinpoint shells began to rip along his straggle of trucks and Chimera troop carriers.
Vehicle after vehicle exploded, showering the street with metal debris, ignited ammunition and plumes of gushing
fuel. NorthCol troopers fled the convoy to either side, dying in further shell-strikes everywhere they turned. Xance’s
truck was overturned by a shell that struck the road alongside it. Blacked out for a few seconds, the general found
himself lying twisted in a mangle of ruptured wreckage and the bloody remains of his command team. There was a
fine, dark drizzle in the air which he realised was a vapour of blood droplets.
He tried to move, but pain gutted him. A transverse-gear rod had disembowelled him. He was half-buried in
splintered body parts.
He moved aside a fragment of leg that lay across his chest, coughing blood. Then a limbless torso that still had the
NorthCol insignia on its braids. Then a severed arm.
He gazed at it. It was his own.
Shells dropped all around, lighting the space with flashes so bright they burned out his optic nerves. They made no
sound, not to him anyway. His eardrums had been punctured by the initial shell strike. Blind and deaf, he could only
sense the carnage around by the quaking of the ground and the Shockwaves that buffeted at him.
Xance was almost the last of his seven hundred-strong unit to die. He had bled to death, howling in rage, before
yet another shell vaporised him.
In House Command, Vice Marshal Anko had fallen silent, his voice robbed to hoarse whispers by the screaming
orders he had been issuing. He slumped across the great chart table as the command staff hurried around, stunned and
helpless.
The chart table made no sense anymore. Runes and sigils flicked on and off, unable to keep up with the progress of
the assault, wavering as contradictory data pummelled back and forth through the straining codifiers. After a while, it
repeated nothing but default setting repeats of house crests.
Anko got up and backed away from the disingenuous table and its silence. He smoothed the front of his white
dress uniform, adjusted the waist buckle under the girth of his belly and pulled out his autopistol.
He shot the table eight times for disobedience, then changed clips and shot two of the aides who ran screaming
from him. He tried to yell, but his voice was nothing but a feeble rasp.
He ran to the ironwork rail and began to fire indiscriminately down into the lower deck, killing or wounding five
more tactical officers and exploding a cogitator unit. VPHC Officer Langana and two servitors tried to wrestle him
to the ground. Anko shot Langana through the left eye and emptied the rest of his third clip into the mouth of one of
the servitors, blowing the upper part of its head away.
Anko threw off the other servitor and got to his feet. He turned to face the great observation window, fumbling for
another clip as the staff fled in panic all around.
He saw the missile plainly, ft seemed to him he could even see the checkerboard markings around its nose-cone,
though he knew that was impossible, given the speed at which it must have been travelling.
Even the fluting of the exhaust ducts, the rivets in the seams.
The missile entered House Command through the great window, slamming a blizzard of lead-glass inwards with
its supersonic bow-wave before striking the rear wall and detonating.
The storm of glass shards stripped Vice Marshal Anko’s considerable flesh from his bones a millisecond before
the blast destroyed House Command.
A brace of Earthshaker shells struck the great Basilica of the Ecclesiarchy east of the Commercia.
The two-thousand-year-old edifice — which had stood firm through the Settlement Wars, the Colonial Uprising,
the Piidestro/Gavunda power struggle and countless bouts of civil unrest and rioting — shattered like glass. The roof
was thrown outwards by the multiple blasts and millions of slate tiles showered the area for kilometres around,
whizzing down like blades.
Stone walls, two metres thick, were levelled in the deluge of fire, flying buttresses sundering and bursting apart.
Precious relics almost as old as the Imperium itself were consumed along with the priesthood. The streets outside
were awash with rivers of molten lead from the roof and the windows. Many devotees of the Imperial cult, citizens
and clerical brethren alike, who had survived the initial impact hurled themselves into the building’s pyre, their faith
utterly destroyed.
At Croe Gate, General Nash tried to reform his beleaguered units and direct them north to the Ontabi breach, even
though fierce Zoican attacks battered the gate position.
House Command was offline and there was no coordination of repulse. Nash reckoned correctly he had 1,500
Roane Deepers and 3,500 Vervun Primary troops. He had been waiting for support from the NorthCol and Xance, but
he had a sick feeling it wasn’t coming. The hammering of the shells was overwhelming.
Nash had been in the infantry since he joined the Guard and he had seen the very worst dog-soldier work it had to
offer. In those first few hours of the Great Assault, his command and leadership was unrivalled in Vervunhive. He set
a condensing resistance around Croe Gate that shut the invaders out, and he countermarched two thirds of his forces
north to Ontabi and the main breach, which was nothing short of overrun.
Nash’s Roane Deepers, never the most celebrated regiment of the Imperial Guard, proved their worth that night at
the eastern extremities of Vervunhive’s Curtain Wall. They met the Zoican infantry pouring into the hive with
determined marksmanship and hand-to-hand brutality.
The Deepers, despite their reputation for laziness and an easygoing attitude, stopped the inrush at Ontabi dead for
two and a half hours. A thousand Roane — supported by and inspiring the Vervun Primary residue — took down
almost 4,500 Zoican troops and nearly a hundred armour elements.
Nash died in a work-hab ruin just before dawn, shot nineteen times as the Zoicans finally broke his last-ditch
defence and swarmed into the hive. Falling back, the Roane and Vervun Primary survivors continued to defend, street
by street, block by block, as the Zoican force rolled in on them.
At Sondar Gate, Zoican stormtroops raised ladders and siege towers to overrun the wall. Marshal Croe had lost
count of the ochre-armoured soldiers he had slain by the time a massive death machine shaped much like a vast
praying mantis thundered forward out of the night and hooked its huge arms around the towers of the Sondar Gate,
ripping them apart. The great mantis-limbs locked and bridging plates extended between them, forming a huge ramp
that allowed the Zoican troops to finally overrun the battlements.
Croe fell as the vast limbs destroyed the entire frontage of the gate battlement.
He was still alive in the rubble outside the collapsed gateway when advancing Zoican troops passed in,
bayoneting any living bodies they kicked.
Marshal Croe died — broken, covered in dust and unrecognisable — with a Zoican bayonet through his heart.
FOURTEEN
THE IMPERIAL WAY OF DEATH
“True to the Throne and hard to kill!”
—The battle-pledge of the Volpone Bluebloods
“Enough!” Gaunt snarled. The gunfire which had been shaking the martial court died away fitfully. The air reeked of
laser discharge, cartridge powder and blood. VPHC corpses littered the floor and the shattered wooden seating
ranks. One or two Bluebloods lay amongst them.
The half-dozen or so surviving VPHC officers, some wounded, had been forced into a corner, and Gilbear and his
men, high on adrenaline, were about to execute them.
“Hold fire!” Gaunt snapped, moving in front of Gilbear, who glowered with anger-bright eyes and refused to put
up his smoking hellgun. “Hold fire, I said! We came down to break up an illegal tribunal. Let’s not make another
wrong by taking the law into our own hands!”
“You can dispense it! You’re a commissar!” Gilbear growled and his men agreed loudly.
“When there’s time — not here. You men, find shackles. Cuff these bastards and lock them in the cells.”
“Do as he says, Gilbear,” Sturm said, approaching and holstering his pistol. The Blueblood troopers began to herd
the prisoners roughly out of the room.
Gaunt looked around the chamber. Pater sat against the far wall, with Bwelt fanning his pallid face with a scribeslate.
Daur was releasing the Narmenian defendants.
The room was a ruin. Sturm’s elite troops had slaughtered more than two thirds of the VPHCers present in a brutal
action that had lasted two minutes and had cost them three Bluebloods. Tarrian was dead, his rib-cage blasted open
like a burned-out ship’s hull.
Gaunt crossed to Kowle. The commissar was sat on one of the lower seating tiers, head bowed, clutching a hellburn
across his right bicep.
“It’s the end for you, Kowle. You knew damn well what an abuse of the law this was. I’ll personally oversee the
avulsion of your career. A public disgrace… for the People’s Hero.”
Kowle slowly looked up into Gaunt’s dark eyes. He said nothing, as there was nothing left to say.
Gaunt turned away from the disturbing beige eyes. He remembered Bal-haut in the early weeks of that campaign.
Serving as part of Slaydo’s command cadre, he had first encountered Kowle and his wretchedly vicious ways. Gaunt
had thought he embodied the very worst aspects of the Commissariat. After one particularly unnecessary punishment
detail, when Kowle had had a man flogged to death for wearing the wrong cap-badge, Gaunt had used his influence
with the warmaster to have Kowle transferred to duties on the south-west continent, away from the main front. That
had been the start of Kowle’s career decline, Gaunt realised now, a decline that had led him to the Vervunhive
posting. Gaunt couldn’t let it go. He turned back.
“You had a chance here, Pius. A chance to make good. You’ve the strength a commissar needs, you just have… no
control. Too busy enjoying the power and prestige of being the chief Imperial commissar to the armies of Verghast.”
“Don’t,” whispered Kowle. “Don’t lecture me. Don’t use my name like you’re my friend. You’re frightened of me
because I have a strength you lack. It was the same on Balhaut, when you were Slaydo’s lap-dog. You thought I
would eclipse you, so you used your position to have me sidelined.”
Gaunt opened his mouth in astonishment. Words failed him for a moment. “Is that what you think? That I reported
you to advance my own career?”
“It’s what I know.” Kowle got to his feet slowly, wiping flecks of blood from his cheek. “Actually, I’m almost
glad its over for me. I can go to my damnation relishing the knowledge that you’ve lost here. Vervunhive won’t
survive now, not with the likes of you and Sturm in charge. You haven’t got the balls.”
“Like you, you mean?” Gaunt laughed.
“I would have led this hive to victory. It’s a matter of courage, of iron will, of making decisions that may be
unpalatable but which serve the greater triumph.”
“I’m just glad that history will never get a chance to prove you wrong, Kowle. Surrender your weapon and rank
pins.”
Kowle stood unmoving for a while, then tossed his pistol and insignia onto the floor. Gaunt looked down at them
for a moment and then walked away.
“Appraise me of the situation upstairs,” Gaunt said to Sturm. “When you arrived, you said the hive was under
assault.”
“A storm on all fronts. It looked grim, Gaunt.” Sturm refused to make eye contact with the Tanith commissar.
“Marshal Croe was ordering a full deployment to repulse.”
“Sir?”
Gaunt and Sturm looked round. Captain Daur stood nearby, his face alarmingly pale. He held out a data-slate. “I
used the stockade’s codifier link to access House Command. I thought you’d want an update and…”
His voice trailed off.
Gaunt took the slate and read it, thumbing the cursor rune to scroll the illuminated data. He could barely believe
what he was seeing. The information was already a half-hour old. The Shield was down. Massive assaults and
shelling had punished the hive. Zoican forces were already inside the Curtain Wall.
Gaunt looked across at Grizmund and his fellow Narmenians, flexing their freed limbs and sharing a flask of
water. He’d come down here on a matter of individual justice and when his back was turned, hell had overtaken
Vervunhive.
He almost doubted there’d be anything left to return to now at the surface.
Under the co-ordinated command of Major Rawne and Colonel Corday, the Tanith and Volpone units holding
Veyveyr Gate staunchly resisted the massive Zoican push for six hours, hammered by extraordinary levels of
shelling. There was no ebb in the heedless advance of Zoican foot troops and the waste ground immediately outside
the gate was littered for hundreds of metres around with the enemy dead. Along the ore-work emplacements at the
top of the Spoil, Mkoll’s marksmen and Ormon’s Spoilers held the slag slopes with relentless expertise.
Mkoll voxed Rawne when his ammunition supplies began to dwindle. Both had sent requests to House Command
for immediate resupply, but the link was dead, and neither liked the look of the great firestorms seething out of the
hive heartland behind them.
Larkin, holding a chimney stack with MkVenner and Domor, had personally taken thirty-nine kills. It was his alltime
best in any theatre, but he had neither time nor compunction enough to celebrate. The more he killed, the more
the memory of the Zoican’s bared face burned in his racing mind.
At the brunt-end of the Veyveyr position, Bragg ran out of rockets for his launcher and discarded it. It was
overheating anyway. His autogun jammed after a few shots, so he moved down the trench, keeping his hefty frame
lower than the parapet as las-fire hammered in, and he took over a tripod-mounted stubber whose crew had been
shot.
As he began to squeeze the brass trigger-pull of the thumping heavy weapon, he saw Feygor spin back and drop
nearby. A las-round had hit him in the neck.
Lesp, the field medic attending the trench, scrambled over to Feygor, leaving a gut-shot Volpone who was beyond
his help.
“Is he okay?” Bragg yelled.
Lesp fought with the struggling Feygor, clamping wet dressings around the scorched and melted flesh of his neck
and trying to clear an airway.
“His trachea is fused! Feth! Help me hold him!”
Bragg fired a last burst or two and then dropped from the stub-nest and ran to Feygor and the slender medic. It
took all of his gargantuan strength to hold Feygor down as Lesp worked. The las-hit had cauterised the wound, so
there was precious little blood, but the heat had melted the larynx and the windpipe into a gristly knot and Feygor
was suffocating.
His eyes were white with pain and fear, and his mouth clacked as he screamed silent curses.
“Feth!” Lesp threw the small, plastic-handled scalpel away in disgust and pulled out his long, silver Tanith knife.
He stuck it into Feygor’s throat under the blackened mass of the scorched wound and opened a slot in the windpipe
big enough to feed a chest-tube down.
Feygor began breathing again, rattling and gurgling through the tube.
Lesp yelled something up at Bragg that a nearby shell-fall drowned out.
“What?”
“We have to get him clear!”
Bragg hoisted Feygor up in his arms without question and began to run with him, back down the lines.
The Tanith units that had held Veyveyr two nights before pushed south from their temporary mustering yard as soon as
the Shield failed. Corbec led them and Sergeant Baffels’ platoon was amongst them.
Lacking orders from House Command, Corbec had agreed to move west while Colonel Bulwar’s NorthCol forces
moved east, hoping to reinforce the Veyveyr and Croe positions.
In tight manufactory enclaves behind the once-proud Veyveyr rail terminal, Corbec’s deployment encountered
crossfire from the west. Corbec realised in horror that while Veyveyr might be sound, the enemy were pouring in
through Sondar Gate unstaunched. He set up a scarifying resistance in a factory structure called Guild Githran
Agricultural and he tried to vox his situation to Rawne or Corday.
Corday eventually responded. It took a while for Corbec to convince him that enemy forces, already in the inner
hive, were in danger of encircling the solid Veyveyr defence.
They chose a window each, coughing in the dust that the bombardment was shaking up from the old floor boards.
Milo saw las-rounds punching through the fibre-board sidings of the broken building, and he heard the grunt-gasp
of flamers. The enemy was right outside.
From the windows, under Baffels’ direction, they fired at will. It was difficult to see what they were hitting. Filain
and Tokar both yowled out victory whoops as they guessed they brought Zoicans down.
Rhys, one window down from Milo, stopped firing and sagged as if very tired.
Milo pulled round and called out to him, stopping short when he saw the bloodless las-hole in Rhys’ forehead.
A falling shell blew out a silo nearby and the building shook.
Colonel Corbec’s voice came over the microbead link, calm and stern.
“This is the one, boys. Do it right, or die here.”
Milo loaded a fresh cell and joined his platoon in blasting from the chewed window holes.
More than three hundred Tanith were still resting, off-guard, in their makeshift chem-plant billet when the Shield
came down and the onslaught began. Sergeant Bray, the ranking officer, had them all dress and arm at once, and he
voxed House Command for instructions.
House Command was dead. Bray found he couldn’t reach Corbec, Rawne or Gaunt — or any military authorities.
What vox-links were still live were awash with mindless panic or the insidious chatter broadcasts of the enemy.
Bray made a command decision, the biggest he’d ever made in his career. He pulled the Tanith under his charge
back from the billets and had them dig in amongst the rubble wastelands behind, wastelands created in the first
bombardment at the start of the war.
It was an informed, judicious command. Gaunt had taught tactics thoroughly and Bray had listened. A move
forward, towards Sondar Gate and the Square of Marshals three kilometres south, would have been foolhardy given
the lack of solid intelligence. Staying put would have left them in a wide, warehouse sector difficult to secure or
defend.
The rubble wastes played directly to the Ghosts’ strengths. Here they could dig in, cover themselves and form a
solid front.
As if to confirm Bray’s decision, mortar fire levelled the chem-plant billets twenty minutes after the Tanith had
withdrawn. Advance storm-units of Zoican infantry crossed into the wasteland half an hour later and were cut down
by the well-defended Ghosts. In the following hours, Bray’s men engaged and held off over two thousand ochre-clad
troops and began to form a line of resistance that stymied the Zoican push in from Sondar Gate.
Then Zoican tanks began to arrive, trundling up through the blasted arterial roads adjoining the Square of
Marshals. They were light, fast machines built for infantry support, ochre-drab and covered with netting, with turrets
set back on the main hull, mounting pairs of small-calibre cannons. Bray had thoughtfully removed all the rocket
grenades and launchers from the billet stockpile, and his men began to hunt tanks in the jagged piles of the wasteland,
leaving their lasrifles in foxholes so they could carry, aim and load the rocket tubes. In three hours of intense fighting,
they destroyed twenty machines. The slipways off the arterials were ablaze with crackling tank hulls by the time
heavier armour units — massive main battle-tanks and super-heavy self-propelled guns— began to roll and clank up
into the chem-district.
Caffran braced against the kick of the rocket launcher and banged off a projectile grenade that he swore went
directly down the fat barrel of an approaching siege tank, blowing the turret clean off. Dust and debris winnowed
back over his position, and he scrambled around to reach another foxhole, Trooper Trygg running with him with the
belt of rockets.
Caffran could hear Bray yelling commands nearby.
He slipped into a drain culvert and sloshed along through the ankle-deep muck. Trygg was saying something
behind him, but Caffran wasn’t really listening.
It was beginning to rain. With the Shield down, the inner habs were exposed to the downpour. The wasteland
became a quagmire of oily mud in under a quarter of an hour. Caffran reached the ruins of a habitat and searched for
a good firing point. A hundred metres away, Tanith launchers barked and spat rockets at the rumbling Zoican
advance. Every few moments, there would be a plangent thump and another tank round would scream overhead.
Caffran was wet through. The rainfall was cutting visibility to thirty metres. He clambered up on the scorched
wreck of an old armchair and hoisted himself up into an upper window space, from which he could get a good view
of the rubble waste outside.
“Toss me a few live ones!” he called down to Trygg.
Trygg made a sound like a scalded cat and fell, severed at the waist. Ochre-armoured stormtroops flooded into the
ruin below Caffran, firing wildly. A shot hit Trugg’s belt of grenades and the blast threw Caffran clear of the building
shell and onto the rubble outside.
Caffran clawed his way upright as Zoicans rushed him from three sides. Pulling out his Tanith dagger, he plunged
it through the eyeslit of the nearest. He clubbed the next down with his rocket tube.
Another shot at him and missed.
Caffran rolled away, firing his loaded rocket launcher. The rocket hit the Zoican in the gut, lifted him twenty
metres into the air and blew him apart.
There was a crack of las-fire and a Zoican that Caffran hadn’t seen dropped dead behind him.
He glanced about.
Holding the laspistol Caffran had given her as a gift, Tona Criid crept out of cover. She turned once, killing
another Zoican with a double shot.
Caffran grabbed her by the hand and they ran into the cover of a nearby hab as dozens more Zoican troopers
advanced, firing as they came.
In the shadows of the hab ruin, Caffran looked at her, one soot-smeared face mirrored by the other.
“Caffran,” he said.
“Criid,” she replied.
The Zoicans were right outside, firing into the ruins.
“Good to know you,” he said.
The cage elevators carried them up as far as Level Sub-6 before the power in the Low Spine failed and the cars
ground to a screeching halt. Soot and dust trickled and fluttered down the echoing shaft from above.
They exited the lifts on their bellies, crawling out through grille-doors that had half missed the next floor, and they
found themselves in a poorly lit access corridor between water treatment plants.
Gaunt and Bwelt had to pull Pater bodily out of the lift car and onto the floor. The old man was panting and
refused to go on.
Gilbear and his troops had fanned down the hallway, guns ready. Daur had guard of Kowle and Sturm was trying
to light a shredded stub-end of cigar. Grizmund and his officers were taut and attentive, armed with shotguns they had
taken from the VPHC dead.
“Where are we?” Gaunt asked Bwelt.
“Level Sub-6. An underhive section, actually.”
Gaunt nodded. “We need a staircase access.”
Down the damp hallway, one of Gilbear’s men cried out he’d found a stepwell.
“Stay with him and move him on when he’s able,” Gaunt told Bwelt, indicating the ailing Pater.
He crossed to Grizmund. “As soon as we reach the surface, I need you to rejoin your units.”
Grizmund nodded. “I’ll do my best. Once I’ve got to them, what channel should we use?”
“Ten ninety gamma,” Gaunt replied. It was the old Hyrkan wavelength. “I’m heading up-Spine to try to get the
Shield back on. Use that channel to co-ordinate. Code phrase is ‘Uncle Dercius’.”
“Uncle Dercius?”
“Just remember it, okay?”
Grizmund nodded again. “Sure. And I won’t forget your efforts today, colonel-commissar.”
“Get out there and prove my belief in you,” Gaunt snarled. “I need the Narmenian armour at full strength if I’m
going to hold this place.”
General Grizmund and his men pushed on past and hurried up the stairs.
“Sounds like you’ve taken command, Gaunt,” Sturm said snidely.
Gaunt turned to him. “In the absence of other command voices…”
Sturm’s face lost its smile and its colour.
“I’m still ranking Guard commander here, Ibram Gaunt. Or had you forgotten?”
“It’s been so long since you issued an order, Noches Sturm, I probably have.”
The two men faced each other in the low, musty basement corridor. Gaunt wasn’t backing down now.
“We have no choice, my dear colonel-commissar: a full tactical retreat. Vervunhive is lost. These things happen.
You get used to it.”
“Maybe you do. Maybe you’ve had more experience in running away than me.”
“You low-life swine!” Gilbear rasped, stomping forward.
Gaunt punched him in the face, dropping him to the floor.
“Get up and get used to me, Gilbear. We’ve got a fething heavy task ahead of us, and I need the best the Volpone
can muster.”
The Volpone troops were massing around them and even Pater had got up onto his feet for a better view.
“The Shield must be turned back on. It’s a priority. We’ve got to get up into the top of the hive and effect that.
Don’t fight me here. There’ll be more than enough fighting to go around later.”
Gaunt reached down with his hand to pull Gilbear up. The big Blue-blood hesitated and then accepted the grip.
Gaunt pulled Gilbear right up to his face, nose to nose.
“So let’s go see what kind of soldier you are, colonel,” the Blueblood said.
They climbed the dim stairs as far as Level Low-2 and then found a set of cargo lifts still supplied with power. The
massive Spine shuddered around them, pummelled from the outside by the enemy.
Crowded into a lift car, the Volpone checked weapons under Gilbear’s supervision. Sturm stood aside, silent.
Gaunt crossed to Daur and his prisoner.
“Ban?”
“Sir?”
“I need schematics of the upper Spine. Anything you can get.”
Ban Daur nodded and began to resource data via his slate.
“Salvador Sondar has total control of the Shield mechanism,” said Kowle suddenly. “He exists on Level Top-700.
His palace is protected by obsidian-grade security.”
Gaunt looked at Kowle bemused.
“It sounded for a moment there like you were trying to help, Pius.”
Kowle spat on the floor. “I don’t really want to die, Ibram. I know this hive. I know its workings. I’d be the
callous bastard you think I am if I didn’t offer my knowledge.”
“Go on,” said Gaunt cautiously.
“Salvador Sondar has been borderline mad since I first met him. He’s a recluse, preferring to spend his time in an
awareness tank in his chambers. Yet he has absolute control of the hive defences. They’re hard-wired into his brain.
If you intend to turn the Shield back on, you’ll have to deal with the High Master himself.”
The lift cage lurched as a Shockwave passed through the Spine. Gaunt looked out of the cage door as they
ascended and he saw a flickering procession of empty halls, then some thick wit screaming habbers beating on the
cage bars. They rose past fire-black levels and ones where twisted skeletons, baked dry by the heat of incendiaries,
clawed at the lift doors.
One level was ablaze and they flinched as they passed up by its flames.
Daur handed Gaunt the slate with a plan of the upper Spine loaded onto it.
Another four hundred levels, Gaunt thought, watching the lights on the lift’s indicator panel, and the High Master
and I will have ourselves a reckoning.
* * *
Lord Chass and his three bodyguards had reached Level Top-700 and forced their way in through the powerless blast
doors.
Shots came their way the moment they emerged, killing one of the bodyguards outright with a head wound.
Chass pulled out his gun and fired it as his remaining bodyguards unshrouded their hand-cannons and blasted
tracer strings down the plush, marble-walled atrium.
A las-round hit Lord Chass in the left knee and dropped him face down onto the carpet. The pain was
extraordinary, but he didn’t cry out. His bodyguards ran to him and were both cut down by sprays of las-fire.
His lifeblood was pumping away through his leg wound. Lord Chass knew he was going to die very soon.
He crawled forward, a few centimetres at a time, soaking the priceless carpet with his blood. He couldn’t see
who or what was firing at him. The atrium was made of green cipolin stone and decorated with House Sondar
banners. Light globes hung on chains from the high roof. At the atrium’s far end, a wide arch led through into the
audience hall, the Sondar chapel and the private residence.
He flopped over behind a sandstone jardinière and loaded a fresh shell into his compact handgun. He thought
about reaching for one of the fallen bodyguards’ laspistols, but they were exposed in the open, and Sondar’s unseen
protectors were raking the carpeted floor with steady fire.
Then the firing stopped. Three meat puppets swung into view in the archway: a cloaked female, a naked youth
covered in gold body-paint, and something rank and emaciated that was only vaguely human anymore. All lolled
wretchedly, eyes vacant, lasrifles wired into their hands. They came unsteadily down the atrium, wobbling on the
feed-tubes and wires that played out from a recessed trackway in the ceiling. Though their eyes didn’t move, they
seemed to sense him. Chass knew they were guided by heat and motion systems wired into the palace walls. They
fired again, blowing chunks off the jardinière and hitting Chass in the foot and shin of his already wounded leg. He
fired his single-shot piece and the heavy round took the youth’s head off. It continued to advance and shoot.
A sudden burst of autogun fire licked down the atrium and tore the puppets to pieces, leaving nothing but a few
shreds of flesh trailing from the wires.
Four men came down the hall from the main entrance. Chass knew their maroon body-glove armour made them
guards from Croe’s personal retinue. Their leader was Isak. He knelt by Lord Chass as his companions moved on to
secure the archway. Isak bowed his respect to the nobleman, then reached into his harness pouches for field
dressings.
“The marshal sent you?”
“I am instructed to take any action necessary to restore the Shield, lord. That includes the suppression of High
Master Sondar and his forces.”
At last Croe is acting with the same purpose as me, thought Chass. He felt no pain from Isak’s work on his
wounds. He was cold and everything seemed distant. “Help me up,” he told the bodyguard. “You’ll need the genoprint
of a noble to activate the Shield systems.”
Isak nodded and hoisted Lord Chass up by the armpits, as if he was as light as a feather. From beyond the arch
came the sounds of renewed gunfire.
In the colonnade beyond the atrium — a long cloister of wooden beams and inlaid upper balconies with a roof of
stained glass — Isak’s men had encountered more servitor puppets. Some were appearing in the balcony galleries,
others moving down the open length of the cloister. The House Croe guardsmen were pinned near the archway.
Lord Chass, leaning heavily on Isak for support, noticed a smell, a spicy taint that stung his nostrils, sweeter and
more subtle than the sharp pungency of the discharged weapons. “What is that smell?” he whispered, half to himself.
“Chaos,” Ibram Gaunt said.
Chass and Isak looked round from the archway where they were sheltering and saw Gaunt leading the team of
Blueblood elite down the atrium with silent precision. Daur, Kowle and Sturm were at the back of the line, Gilbear
alongside the commissar. All weapons were drawn.
“It seems we share a mission,” Gaunt said dryly. He gestured to Gilbear and the Volpone moved three of his seven
troopers round to cover the far side of the arch. In a moment, they were adding the considerable force of their
hellguns to the dispute.
“Sic semper tyrannis,” Chass whispered and smiled at Gaunt. “I knew you would serve Vervunhive with true
valour…”
His voice was faint. Gaunt looked at the wounds that mauled the nobleman’s leg. Isak had applied a tourniquet
high up on the thigh, but his robes were soaked with blood.
Gaunt caught Isak’s look. They both knew how close to death Chass was.
Chass knew it too. “I’d like to see us victorious before my passing, colonel-commissar.”
Gaunt nodded. He shouted to the Volpone. “Let’s not waste any more time! Take the chamber now!”
Gilbear looked across and tapped the grenade launcher mounted under his hellgun’s barrel with a predatory grin.
“Permission?”
“Given!” said Gaunt. “Tell your men in there to duck and cover!” he told Isak and the bodyguard snarled through
his microbead.
Gilbear and one of his point men bellowed the Volpone battle-pledge at the tops of their lungs as they launched
grenade after grenade in through the arch. The launcher mechanisms thumped and clacked as they pumped them.
The blast, a series of explosions piled on top of one another, ripped back down the colonnade and blew out the
galleries and the glass roof. Debris and ash washed back through the arch.
Before the smoke even began to clear, the Volpone stormed the room, yelling and firing. Whatever else he thought
about them, Gaunt had to give the Bluebloods their due. They were finely trained, ruthlessly effective heavy troops.
He’d seen their worth on Monthax. Now they were proving it again.
With his bolt pistol and chainsword drawn, Gaunt ploughed into the colonnade after them, followed by Isak and
the Croe guards, with Daur and Sturm left to assist Chass. Kowle simply wandered along behind.
The place was a ruin. Dismembered or support-severed servitors littered the wooden wreckage. One puppet,
which had been standing on a now-collapsed balcony, swung above their heads like a corpse in a gibbet.
The Bluebloods fanned out, moving down side halls, exchanging fire with lifeless defenders.
“Which way?” Gaunt asked Chass, but the wounded man was only semiconscious.
“The audience hall is down to the left,” Isak said.
“What did you mean, the smell was Chaos?” asked Chass suddenly swimming awake.
“The filth that corrupted Ferrozoica is here. It’s got inside House Sondar, permeating everything. Probably why
the bastard turned the Shield off. Kowle said Sondar was wired directly into the hive’s systems. I’d lay bets that’s
how it got to him, infecting him like a disease.”
“You mean the hive systems are corrupted too?”
“No — but Sondar has listened to lies that have come directly into his mind. The fact they say he was mad to
begin with can’t help.” He checked ahead and saw the large double-doors to the chamber. “With me!” Gaunt yelled,
his chainsword buzzing murderously. The Volpone fireteam formed up behind him and had to run to keep up.
Gaunt burst through the doors and clashed directly with more servitor puppets in the entrance lobby. His
chainsword cut through support wires and flesh. He hacked clear of their murderous attentions as Gilbear and his
men came in behind, finishing the rest.
The audience chamber was large and softly lit. The air was warm and now so much thicker with the taint-smell.
Muslin wall drapes twitched in the ventilator breeze. On the far side of the room sat a large, iron tank — its shell
rich with verdigris from its brass fittings — fashioned with a single, baleful porthole in the front.
“I see you. What are you?” asked an electronic voice that came from all around.
Gaunt walked towards the awareness tank. “I am the agency of Imperial authority on this world.”
“I am the authority here,” said the voice. “I am the High Master of Vervun-hive. You are nothing. I see you and you
are nothing. Begone.”
“Salvador Sondar — if you still answer to that name — your power is ended. In the name of the God-Emperor of
Mankind and for the continued welfare of this subject planet, I order you to surrender yourself to the Imperial
Guard.”
“Surrender?”
“Do it. You will not enjoy the alternative.”
“You have nothing that threatens me. Nothing to tempt me. Heritor Asphodel has promised me this world in
totality. The chatter has told me this.”
“Asphodel is the spawn of the warp, and his promises are meaningless. I give you one last chance to comply.”
“And I give you this.”
The servitor came into the room through a doorway concealed by muslin drapes. Sondar’s macabre fascination
with his meat-toys was infamous in the noble houses, and many efforts had been made to curtail his surgical whims
and clone-farming over the years.
This thing was far more than that, more even than the deluded creation of a mad flesh-engineer. The insanity of the
warp was in it: eighteen hundred kilos of scarred meat and gristle, bigger than a Hyrkan antlerdon, a jigsaw of human
parts fused into the carcass of a wild auroch from the grasslands. Limbs twisted and writhed around it, some human
with grasping hands, some animal, some wet, glistening pseudopods like the muscular feet of giant molluscs. The
massive head was an eyeless mouth full of needle teeth, that smacked slackly and gurgled. The donor auroch’s vast
horns swept outwards from the low skull crest. A multitude of cables, feeds and wires suspended it, but unlike the
other meat puppets, this thing moved of its own volition, pawing and stamping the soft carpet, writhing and pulsing.
The smell was overwhelming.
Gilbear and the Volpone backed off a few paces in astonishment. Sturm cried out in horror and one of the House
Croe bodyguards turned and ran.
The meat-beast came for them, moving with a speed and fluidity that seemed impossible for something so vast. It
howled as it came, a piercing, sibilant shriek of rage. Gaunt leapt aside and was knocked over by a flailing
pseudopod. The slime burned through his leather coat where it touched.
Gilbear fired twice, blowing open holes in the lower belly of the thing. These issued spurts of stagnant pus onto
the carpet. Then the Blueblood colonel was flying through the air, tossed aside by a twist of the huge horns.
Backing frantically, the other Volpone fired wildly. Blubbery, wet punctures appeared in the creature’s flank, some
oozing filmy fluid, others erupting with sprays of tissue and watery blood. A cloned human arm was blown right off
and lay twitching on the ground.
A screaming Volpone was hoisted into the air and shaken violently to death, impaled through the chest on one of
the horns. Another was crushed under the meat-beast’s bulk, leaving a trampled mess of blood, bone and broken
armour pressed into the carpet. Grasping limbs and curling pseudopods caught hold of a third and began to pull him
apart, slowly and inexorably. His agonised wailing drowned out the meat-beast’s keening roar.
Gaunt scrambled up, dazed, and shot the clasped Volpone through the head to end his drawn-out death. He fired
again and again, until the sickle clip of his bolt gun was empty, the powerful close-range shots blowing chunks of
raw meat and translucent fat out of the creature. Blood and ichor spurted from the wounds.
The monster wheeled round at Gaunt, wailing. Head down, it charged him and the horns, one still decorated with
the limp corpse of the Volpone soldier, smashed into the chamber wall, gouging the ceramite facing. Gaunt dived
aside, swinging his chainsword round with both hands. The purring blade sliced through the top of the skull and
chopped one of the horns off. Then Gaunt was rolling away again, trying to stay out of reach of the biting maw that
chased after him, drooling spittle. With its attention on Gaunt, the meat-beast had turned away from the remaining
Volpone and they resumed firing, ripping into the thing’s hindquarters but apparently doing nothing to slow it down.
Gaunt knew that daemonic force pulsed inside the beast, a life-energy that animated it beyond any considerations
of physical function. If there was a brain or any vital organs at all, they would be useless as targets. The thing wasn’t
alive in any real sense. It couldn’t be killed the way a human could be killed.
Daur was firing too now, as were the remaining House Croe guards, and Kowle had scooped up the weapon of a
dead Volpone, adding his own shots to the fight. Chass was slumped limply in a corner, unconscious. There was no
sign of Sturm.
Gaunt hacked into the thing again, ripping through ribs. His chainsword was matted and clogged with the beast’s
fluid and tissue, and steam was rising from the blade where it was being eaten away by the toxic deposits.
Gaunt cursed. Delane Oktar, his old mentor, now long dead, had given him that sword on Darendara, right at the
start of his career, when he had still been green and eager. He had carried it ever since, all through his time with the
Hyrkans until his service under Slaydo at Balhaut, and beyond to Tanith and every victory of his beloved Ghosts. Its
destruction hurt him more than he could say. It took the past from him, took his memories and victories away.
He jammed the dying blade into the beast’s shoulder, kicking out a wash of toxic blood and bone chips. Wedged
fast, the sword disintegrated and the power unit in the grip exploded. Gaunt was thrown backwards.
The thing lunged down after him, biting at his kicking boots as he scrambled backwards on his backside. Isak and
two of the Volpone surged forward, firing to cover him and draw the thing away. As it wheeled on them, Gaunt found
himself dragged clear. It was Gilbear. Blood flecked the front of his armaplas chestplate and there was rage in his
eyes. He hauled Gaunt back towards the green bulk of the iron tank.
Another Volpone was caught by the beast’s clamping jaws and shredded by savage bites of its teeth. The walls and
drapes of the audience hall were sprayed heavily with blood now.
The creature turned on Isak, snapping off his head and shoulders with one crushing bite. His body fell beneath its
clawing, stamping legs.
“A gun!” Gaunt yelled to Gilbear.
“Lost mine!” replied the Blueblood colonel, referring to the hellgun that had been tossed aside with him. He had
out his powerful sidearm, a long-barrelled autogun plated with chrome. He put shell after shell into the creature’s
neck.
Gaunt scrambled forward, retrieving his boltgun, and slammed a fresh clip into the receiver. He would kill this
thing before he died. By the ghosts of Tanith, he would.
The meat-beast slew one of the remaining Croe guards and flew at Daur and Kowle, trailing meat and blood from
its mouth. Both men stood their ground, exhibiting levels of bravery as high as any Gaunt had ever witnessed. They
pumped relentless shots into the approaching nightmare. Nothing slowed it.
Hastily they both dived aside. Daur rolled into Chass’ crumpled body and frantically tried to reload.
Kowle landed on a Volpone corpse. The creature headed for him.
“Get clear!” Gaunt bellowed. Kowle was apparently fumbling with the dead Blueblood’s equipment belts. Gaunt
and Gilbear fired again in a futile attempt to drop the thing.
At the final moment, Kowle turned and rose. He faced the rushing beast with his arms held out. He was clutching a
canvas web of grenades. The meat-beast bit his arms off at the elbows and Kowle tumbled backwards, blood jetting
from the stumps. He didn’t make a sound.
The creature convulsed, retched and exploded from within. Its massive torso blew out in a rush of flame and body
matter. A spinning section of rib, thrown out by the blast, stuck quivering into the wall near Gaunt like a spear.
Flames gouted out of the huge mouth.
The beast collapsed onto the floor, pulling feed lines and wires out of the ceiling. The pool of stinking fluid
spreading beneath it began to burn the carpet away.
With Gilbear behind him, Gaunt crossed to the carcass. “We need a flamer. We need to burn this abomination as
soon as possible.”
“Yes, colonel-commissar,” Gilbear answered, turning to the surviving Volpone.
Kowle, on his back in a widening circle of blood, was still alive. Gaunt knelt beside him, soaking his knees.
“Said… you… didn’t have the balls,” Kowle said, his voice so weak it was barely audible.
Gaunt had no words for him.
“Envy you…”
“What?” Gaunt asked, bending closer.
“Balhaut… you were there at the victory, with the warmaster. I envy you. I would have given… everything to
share in that…”
“Pius, you—”
“Shut up, Gaunt… not interested in… anything you have to say to me. You took my honour away, you… ruined me.
I hope the Emperor… will forgive you for robbing Terra of a… great leader like me…”
Gaunt shook his head. He reached into his pocket and pulled out Kowle’s rank studs and cap badge. Carefully and
deferentially, he pinned them back in place. Kowle seemed to notice what Gaunt was doing, though his eyes were
wide and dilated, and the blood was now merely trickling from his ghastly stumps.
“Goodbye, commissar. You gave your best.”
Gaunt saluted, a sharp, smart gesture he hadn’t made in a long time.
Kowle smiled, barely, then died.
Gaunt got up from the corpse of the People’s Hero and crossed to the awareness tank. “Get Lord Chass up. Get the
Shield back on,” he said to Daur sourly. Daur nodded and began to raise the feeble Verghast noble.
Gilbear joined Gaunt at the tank. They looked down at the thickly glazed porthole.
“Come up with a way for me to pay you back as soon as you can,” Gaunt said, not looking round at the Volpone.
“What?”
“You pulled me clear of the beast. I don’t want to be in the debt of a high-caste bastard like you any longer than I
have to be.”
Gilbear grinned. “I think I may have underestimated you, Gaunt. I had no idea you were such an arrogant swine.”
Gaunt glanced round. It would take another Ibram Gaunt and a whole different universe for there to be any trust or
comradeship between him and Gilbear. But for now, in the thick of this nightmare, Gaunt couldn’t help respecting the
soldier, for that was what he was: a devoted soldier of the God-Emperor, just like Gaunt. They didn’t have to like
each other to make it work. A measure of understanding and honour between them was enough.
Gaunt bent down to look through the port glass, and Gilbear did likewise at his side.
Through the fog of murky, phlogistic fluid, they could just make out a frail, naked body, withered and corrupted,
drifting inside the tank, its skull linked to wires and cables that curled upwards to the roof.
“We can call it quits if you let me finish this,” said Gilbear.
“He’s all yours,” said Gaunt.
Gilbear smirked, arming the hellgun he had just retrieved. “What about your due process? What about taking the
law into your own hands?” he asked sarcastically.
“I can dispense it. I’m a commissar. That’s what you said, wasn’t it?”
Gilbear nodded and fired two shots through the portal window. Filthy green water rushed out in torrents, flooding
the floor. Steam rose from it.
Gilbear leaned down once the force of the outrush slackened, and he watched the twitching, spasming form of the
High Master trembling in his draining tank. He fired a grenade in through the broken port and turned away.
A dull crump and the sheet of steam that billowed out of the window hole marked the end of Salvadore Sondar,
High Master of Vervunhive.
Daur had carried Chass over to the brass console in the wall and he helped the enfeebled lord punch in the
override settings. Chass mumbled the codes to Daur just in time. The noble was dead by the time Gaunt reached
them.
The runic sigils on the console plate asked for a noble geno-print. Gaunt simply lifted one of Chass’ limp hands
and pressed it to the reader-slate.
“Sic semper tyrannis, Lord Chass,” Gaunt whispered.
“Did he see victory, sir?” asked Daur.
“He saw enough. We’ll find out if this is a victory or not.”
Automated systems cycled and whirred. Deep in the bowels of Vervun-hive, field batteries throbbed. The pylon
crackled and the anchor stations that remained intact raised their masts.
With a resounding, fulminating crack and a reek of ozone, the Shield was reignited.
Ibram Gaunt left the audience hall of House Sondar and walked up onto an enclosed roof terrace that overlooked
the entire hive. Fires burned below, thousands of them, and streaks of constant shelling lit the air. The Shield
overhead glowed and crackled.
Now the Last Ditch had begun.
FIFTEEN
DAY THIRTY-FIVE
“Target and deny! By our deaths shall they know us!”
—General Coron Grizmund, at the start of the Narmenian counterattack
Overnight, between the thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth days of the war, Vervunhive had come to the brink of destruction.
Now, like a clenching muscle, the Imperial forces tightened and backed through the inner habs and elite sectors,
resisting the encircling foe. For all their massive numbers, the Zoicans could only attack by land with the Shield
reactivated. The dense streets, city blocks, habitats and thoroughfares favoured the defenders, who could dig in and
hold the Zoican push.
Corday and Rawne dragged their forces back from Veyveyr into the worker habs a bare half hour before they
could be encircled by enemy forces reaching upwards from Sondar Gate. NorthCol and Vervun Primary battalions
pushed west to support the retreating Roane, still resisting street by street as they fell back from the Croe and Ontabi
Gates. Colonel Bulwar had nominal command of that front.
Five thousand Vervun Primary troopers under Captain Cargin still held the Hass West Fort fast, though looping
columns of Zoican infantry were beginning to bracket them through the chemical plant district.
Throughout the inner habs south of the Main Spine, Imperial units tried to stem the advance. Sergeant Bray
directed the Tanith in the wastes north of the chem district. Volpone, NorthCol and Vervun Primary sections strung
out to his east, where Corbec’s remaining Tanith and a force of Roane Deepers under Major Relf had consolidated a
wide area of manufactories.
The fighting there was thick, as thick as any in the hive. Guild Githran Agricultural had been held since the small
hours of the morning. Corbec’s platoons had precious little ammo left and no food. They had been fighting all-out for
six hours straight. Enemy flamer-tanks holding the north-south arterial highway rightly were preventing the Tanith
from obtaining munitions from the better-provided Roane, just half a kilometre away to the east. The Tanith were
forced to scavenge for ammo, running out of cover in twos and threes to loot the fallen Zoicans. At least with the
Shield reactivated, they were spared the worst of the shelling, though the enemy armour and field pieces now set up
inside the Shield dome were unrelenting.
Baffels whistled a command, and Milo, Neskon and Cocoer dashed from the cover of a derelict abattoir and
scurried towards a burning textile mill. Dremmond covered their run with spurts from his flamer. The three Tanith
had bayonets fixed. They were all out of ammo, except Cocoer, who had only a handful of shots left.
Six Zoicans lay dead behind the rear wall of the mill. The trio descended on them and stripped them of las-cells.
Each corpse had six or seven as well as musette bags filled with stick grenades.
Milo looked up. The air throbbed with las-fire and though the Shield had shut out the rain, the ground was slick
and muddy. Me pulled Neskon down into cover. Enemy fire chased down the mill wall, cracking holes in the plaster
facing and puffing out brick dust.
A fireteam of Zoican stormtroopers was advancing through the ruins to the west of the mill. Cocoer now had a
fresh clip in his Guard-issue weapon and he fired twice, missing his targets but causing the Zoicans to duck and
cover.
“We’re pinned!” Milo hissed into his microbead.
“Stay down,” the voice of Sergeant Baffels crackled back.
They did. Neskon poked his head up long enough to be shot at.
“Come on, Baffels!” Milo added urgently. They could hear the crunching footfalls of the Zoicans barely ten paces
from their cover.
“Just another moment,” Baffels reassured his friend.
Loud las-shots cracked over the ruins, single shots, high-powered.
“You’re clear! Go!” Baffels squawked.
Milo led the way, Neskon and Cocoer on his heels. He got a glimpse of the Zoicans behind him, sprawled dead
from clean head-shots.
Milo smiled.
The trio slid into cover in the agricultural manufactory, safe behind a solid ceramite wall. Baffels and other Tanith
crowded round them as they shared out the clip-cells and the stick-bombs.
Milo looked across the roofless factory-space and saw Larkin dug in high up near a vent hatch. The Tanith snipers,
along with the Spoilers, had drawn back from the Spoil. Milo had known that the precision killing of the Zoicans had
been the work of marksmen.
He flashed a grin up at Larkin. The weasely sniper winked back.
Milo handed a cell to Baffels. “Your turn next time,” he joked.
“Of course,” said Baffels. Hours before he had ceased to recognise the humour in anything.
“Colm?”
Corbec looked up out of the loophole he was holding, his shaggy head coated in soot and grime. He shot a
beaming grin when he saw Mkoll.
“About time you got here.”
“Came as fast as we could. The bastards have the Spoil now. We left it to them.”
Corbec got up and slapped Mkoll on the arm. “You all make it through?”
“Yeah, Domor, Larkin, MkVenner — all the boys. I’ve spread them out through our lines.”
“Good work. We need good marksman coverage all along. Feth, but this is ugly work.”
They looked round, hearing angry voices down the burned-out hall. Vervun Primary troops with long-barrelled
lasguns were moving in to join the defence.
“The Spoilers, so called,” Mkoll explained to his colonel. “Dedicated to protecting the Spoil. Took a while to
convince them that falling back was the smart choice. They’d have held the slag-slopes forever. It’s a pride thing.”
“We understand pride, don’t we?” grimaced Corbec.
Mkoll nodded. He pointed out the leader of the Spoilers, a bulky man with bloodshot eyes who was doing most of
the shouting and cursing. “That’s ‘Gak’ Ormon. Spoiler commander.”
Corbec sauntered over to the big Verghastite.
“Corbec, Tanith First-and-Only.”
“Major Ormon. I want to lodge a complaint, colonel. Your man Mkoll ordered our withdrawal from the Spoil, and
—”
Corbec cut him short. “We’re fighting for our fething lives and you want to complain? Shut up. Get used to it.
Mkoll made a good call. Another half an hour and you would have been surrounded and dead. You want a ‘spoil’ to
defend? Take a look!” He gestured out of a shattered window at the wasteland around. “Start thinking like a soldier,
and stop cussing and whining. There’s more than unit pride at stake here.”
Ormon opened and closed his mouth a few times like a fish. “I’m glad we understand each other,” Corbec said.
In the north-eastern corner of the hive, Sergeant Varl and Major Rodyin had command of one hundred and seventy or
so men holding the burning docks. Half were Tanith; the rest, Vervun Primary and Roane. Zoican stormtroops were
blasting in along the Hass East Causeway under the Hiraldi road-bridge, and the Imperial forces were being driven
back through the hive’s promethium depots. Several bulk capacity tanks were already ablaze and liquescent fire
spurted from derricks and spout-vents.
Firing tight bursts, Varl crossed a depot freightway and dropped into cover beside Major Rodyin, who had paused
to fiddle with the cracked lens of his spectacles.
“No sign of support. I’ve been trying the vox. We’re on our own,” the Vervun officer remarked.
Varl nodded. “We can do that. Just a few of us should be able to keep them busy in these industrial sectors.”
“Unless they move armour our way.”
Varl sighed. The hiver was pessimism personified.
“Did you see the way the Zoicans’ armour was smeared with tar and oil?”
“I did,” said Varl, clipping off a few more shots. “What of it?”
“I think that’s how they got in, how they broke us open. They came through the pipeline from Vannick Hive.”
Rodyin pointed out across the depot to the series of vast fuel-pipe routes that came in over the river on metal stilt
legs from the northern hinterlands. “The pipes come in right under the Curtain Wall.”
“Why the feth weren’t they shut down?” snapped Varl.
Rodyin shrugged. “They were meant to be. That’s what I was told, anyway. The directive was circulated weeks
ago, right after Vannick was obliterated. The guilds controlling the fuelways were ordered to blow the pipes on the
far shore and fill the rest with rockcrete.”
“Someone didn’t do their job properly,” Varl mused. Somehow the information aggravated him. It was way too
fething late to find out how they had been breached.
The fight at hand took his mind off it. Persistent rocket grenades were tumbling onto them from a loading dock at
the edge of the depot. Varl ordered a pack of Roane down to establish covering fire and then sent Brostin in with the
flamer.
He edged the rest of his men along down the devastated depot roadway, sometimes using the litter of metal plating
and broken girders as cover, sometimes having to negotiate ways over or around it. A fuel lank sixty metres away
blew out with huge, bright fury.
Logris, Meryn and Nehn, working forward with a handful of Vervun Primary troopers, almost ran into a Zoican
fireteam in a drain-away under one of the main derrick rigs. The Tanith laid in fearlessly with bayonets, but the
Vervunhivers tried to find room to shoot and several were cut down.
Hearing the commotion over his microbead, Varl charged in with several other Tanith, spiking the first ochresuited
soldier he met with his silver bayonet. Another sliced at him with a boarding hatchet and Varl punched his
head off with one blow from his metal arm.
Major Rodyin came in behind, shooting his autopistol frantically. He seemed pale and short of breath. Varl knew
that Rodyin had never been in combat like this before. In truth, the man had never been in combat at all before that
day. Three desperate, bloody minutes of close fighting cleared the drain-away of Zoicans. Logris and Nehn set up solid
fire positions down the gully, overlooking the dock causeway.
Rodyin took off his glasses and tried to adjust the earpieces with shaking hands. He looked like he was about to
weep.
“You alright, major?” Varl asked. He knew full well Rodyin wasn’t, but he suspected it had less to do with combat
shock and more to do with the sight of his home city falling around him. Varl could certainly sympathise with that.
Rodyin nodded, replacing his spectacles. “The more I kill, the better I feel.”
Nearby, Corporal Meryn laughed. “The major sounds like Gaunt himself!”
The notion seemed to please Rodyin.
“What now? Left or right?” Meryn asked. He was wearing bulky fuel-worker’s overalls in place of the Tanith kit
which had been scorched off him. His seared scalp was caked with dried blood and matted tufts of scorched hair.
“Feth knows,” Varl answered.
“Right. We try to push down the river towards the bridge,” Rodyin said with great certainty.
Varl said nothing. He’d rather have stayed put or even fallen back a little to consolidate. The last thing they
wanted was to overreach themselves, yet Rodyin was determined. Varl was uneasy following the major, even though
the Verghastite had rank. But Willard was dead — Varl had seen his burning body fall from the Wall — and there
was no one of authority to back him up.
So they moved east, daring the open firestorms of the docks, winning back Vervunhive a metre at a time.
* * *
General Grizmund walked down the steps of the Main Spine exit, adjusting his cap and powersword. Wind-carried
ash washed back across the stone terrace of the Commercia where the Narmenian tanks were drawn up: one hundred
and twenty-seven main battle tanks of the Leman Russ pattern, with twenty-seven Demolishers and forty-two light
support tanks. Their engines revved, filling the air with blue exhaust smoke and thunder.
Brigadier Nachin saluted his general.
“Good to have you back, sir,” he said.
Grizmund nodded. He and the other officers liberated by Gaunt from the hands of the VPHC were more than ready
to see action.
Grizmund pulled his command officers into a huddle and flipped out the hololithic display of a data-slate. A threedimensional
light-map of the Commercia and adjacent districts billowed into the sooty air. Grizmund began to
explain to his commanders what he wanted them to do, how they would be deployed, what objectives they were to
achieve.
His voice was relayed by vox/pict drones to all the Narmenian crews. His briefing turned into a speech, a rousing
declamation of power and victory. At the end of it, the tank crews, more than a thousand men, cheered and yelled.
Grizmund walked down the line of growling tanks and clambered deftly up onto his flag-armour, The Grace of the
Throne, a long-chassis Russ variant with a hundred and ten-centimetre main weapon. Like all the Narmenian
vehicles, it was painted mustard-drab and bore the Imperial eagle crest and the spiked fist sigil of Narmenia.
It felt like coming home. Grizmund dropped down through the main turret’s hatch, strapped himself into the
command chair, and plugged the dangling lead of his headset into the vox-caster.
Grizmund tested the vox-link and made sure he had total coverage.
He pulled the recessed lever that clanged the top-hatch down, and he saw his driver, gunner and loader grinning
up at him from the lower spaces of the tank hull.
“Let’s give them hell,” Grizmund said to his crew and, via the vox, to all his men.
The Narmenian tank units roared down through the Commercia and back into the war.
House Command was a molten ruin full of scorched debris and a few fused corpses. The blast that had taken it out
had also blown out the floor and disintegrated the Main Spine structure for three levels below. Gaunt viewed it from
the shattered doorway for a minute or two.
Searching the adjacent areas, Gaunt appropriated a Ministorum baptistry on Level Mid-36 as a new command
centre. Under Daur’s supervision, workteams cleared the pews and consecration tables and brought in codifiers and
vox-systems liberated from dozens of houses ordinary on that level. Gaunt himself hefted a sheet of flakboard onto
the top of the richly decorated font to make a desk. He began to pile up his data-slates and printouts.
Ecclesiarch Immaculus and his brethren watched the Imperial soldiers overrun their baptistry. It was one of the
few remaining shrines in the hive still intact. They had been singing laments for the basilica when Gaunt arrived.
Immaculus joined Gaunt at his makeshift desk.
“I suppose you’re going to tell me this is sacrilege,” Gaunt said.
The old man in long, purple robes shook his head wearily. “You fight for the Imperial cause, my son. In such
manner, you worship the Emperor more truly than a hundred of my prayers. If our baptistry suits your needs, you are
welcome to it.”
Gaunt inclined his head reverently and thanked the Ecdesiarch.
“Baptise this war in blood, colonel-commissar,” Immaculus said.
The cleric had been nothing but gracious and Gaunt was anxious to show his appreciation. “I will feel happier if
you and your brothers would hold vigil here for us, watching over this place as a surety against destruction.”
Immaculus nodded, leading his brethren up to the celebratory, from where their plainsong chants soon echoed.
Gaunt viewed the data-slates, seeing the depth of the destruction. He made note marks on a paper chart of the hive.
Daur brought him the latest reports. Xance was dead; Nash too. Sturm had vanished. As Gaunt surveyed the lists
of the dead, Major Otte of the Vervun forces, the lord marshal’s adjutant, arrived in the baptistry. He was wounded
and shellshocked, one of the few men to make it clear of the fall of Sondar Gate.
He saluted Gaunt. “Marshal Croe is slain,” he said simply.
Gaunt sighed.
“As ranking officer of Vervun Primary, I hand command to you, as ranking Imperial commander.”
Gaunt stood up and solemnly received the salute with one of his own. What he had suspected ever since he led the
assault on Sondar’s lair was now confirmed: he was the senior surviving Imperial officer in Vervunhive and so
overall military authority was now his. All senior ranks, both local and off-world, were dead or missing. Only
Grizmund held a rank higher than Gaunt and armour was always subservient to an infantry command.
Otte presented Gaunt with Croe’s sword of office: the powerblade of Heironymo Sondar.
“I can’t accept—”
“You must. Whoever leads Vervunhive to war must carry the sword of Heironymo. It is a custom and tradition we
have no wish to break.”
Gaunt accepted, allowing Otte to formally buckle the carrying sash around him.
Intendant Banefail of the Administratum, surrounded by a procession of servitors and clerks, entered the baptistry
as Otte was performing the ceremony. He nodded to Gaunt gravely and accepted his authority without question.
“My ministry is at your disposal, commander. I have mobilised labour teams to assist in fire control and damage
clearance. We… are overwhelmed by the situation. Most of the population is trying to flee across the river, all
militarised units request ammunition supply, the main—”
Gaunt raised his hand. “I am confident the Administratum will provide whatever they can, whatever is in their
means. I trust the astropaths have been maintaining contact with the warmaster?”
“Of course.”
“I will not ask Macaroth for aid, but I want him to understand the situation here. If he deems it worthy of his
notice, he will assist us.”
Horns sounded, a pathetic gesture of pomp, and Legislator Anophy shuffled into the baptistry with his retinue: a
long train of child-slaves, servitors and guards, some carrying banner poles. The banners and the robes were singed
and grubby in places, and the slaves looked wet-eyed and terrified. Representatives of the guilds and high houses
flocked in behind the Legislator’s procession, shouting and disputing.
Gaunt turned to Banefail. “You can help me immediately by keeping these worthies out of my face. Listen to their
petitions and notarise them. I will review later — if there is an opportunity.”
“It will be done,” Banefail said. “May the Emperor of Mankind provide for you in this hour.”
As the Administratum staff swept away behind Banefail to head off the angry mob of dignitaries, Gaunt resumed
his review of the battle data. The first of the vox-links had just been set up and Daur brought him a speaker set.
Gaunt selected a channel. “Vervunhive Command to Grizmund. Signal ‘Uncle Dercius’.”
“ ‘Uncle Dercius’ given and heard,” crackled the receiver.
“I need you to deny the approaches to Croe Gate and Ontabi Gate. From what I can see here, the main vehicular
invasion is pouring in that way.”
“Agreed. But there are tank squadrons coming up through Sondar Gate too.”
“Noted. I’ll deal with that. May the God-Emperor guide you, general.”
“And watch over you, colonel-commissar.”
Adjusting his channel setting, Gaunt raised the commander of North-Col armour groups milling in confusion south
of the Commercia. He directed them down towards Sondar Gate. Then he began to systematically contact all the
tattered sections of infantry and Guard.
He got through to Corbec at Guild Githran Agricultural.
“Feth, commissar! I thought you were dead!”
“I thought the same of you, Colm. How is it?”
“Bad as anything I’ve seen. We’re holding, just barely, but they’re pouring it on. I could really do with a pinch of
armour.”
“It’s coming your way as we speak. Colm, we need to do more than hold, we have to push them back. The Shield
will only work for us if we can hunt them out from under it.”
“You don’t ask for much, do you?”
“Never.”
“You’ll owe me a planet of my own for this, you realise?”
“I owe you that already, Corbec. Think bigger.”
A servitor brought Gaunt more data feeds from the newly engaged codifiers set up in the baptistry. Gaunt looked
through them, his gaze stopped by a report relayed in from Varl.
“Daur?”
“Sir!”
“I want a list of guilds controlling fuel supply and accredited proof from every damn one of them that they closed
their pipelines down.”
“Yes, commander.”
Gaunt spent the next ten minutes voxing tactical instructions to dozens of individual troop units throughout the hive.
He was unable to reach Varl or any unit north of the Main Spine. As he worked, servitors and staff officers tracked
the substance and matter of his battle-plan on a hololithic chart of the city, overlaying it with any data they received
from the ground.
For a short while, Gaunt toyed with the settings of the vox-unit, hunting through the bands to locate the low
frequencies the Zoicans were using. He still hoped they might intercept and unscramble the Zoican transmissions and
eavesdrop on their tactical command net. But it was futile. The Zoican channels were seething with transmissions,
but all in that incomprehensible chatter, the chatter that defied translation even by linguistic cogitators, a constant,
meaningless stream of corrupt machine noise that gave up no secrets. Either that, or the chanting repeats of the
Heritor’s name on the propaganda wavelengths. Gaunt had fought Chaos long enough to know not to call in human
scholars or astropaths to try to decode the chatter. He couldn’t allow that filth to taint any mind in Vervunhive.
A commotion at the door roused Gaunt from his work. A detail of Vervun Primary soldiers was escorting General
Sturm into the baptistry.
“We found him trying to join a party of refugees boarding a ferry at the viaduct jetty, sir,” the squad’s leader told
Gaunt.
Gaunt looked Sturm up and down. “Desertion?” he said softly.
Sturm straightened his cap, bristling. “I am senior commander here, Gaunt! Not you! Vervunhive is lost! I have
given the signal to retreat and evacuate! I could have you all shot for disobedience!”
“You… gave the signal to evacuate? Then why are all Imperial forces and planetary units still fighting? Even your
own Volpone? You must have given the signal very quietly.”
“Don’t talk that way to me, you jumped-up shit!” Sturm croaked. The room fell silent around them and all eyes
turned to observe the confrontation. “I am the senior general of the Royal Volpone! I am ranking officer here in
Vervunhive! You will obey me! You will respect me!”
“What’s to respect?” Gaunt walked around Sturm, looking out at the watching faces with interest. No one showed
any sign of leaping to the general’s defence. “You fled the assault on House Sondar. You fled the Main Spine and
headed for the river. You gave up on Vervunhive.”
“I am ranking officer!”
With a brutal tear, Gaunt ripped Sturm’s rank pins of his jacket.
“Not anymore. You’re a disgrace. A coward — and a murderer. You know damn well it was your orders that
killed five hundred of my Tanith on Voltemand. Killed them because they managed to win what your Blue-bloods
could not.” Gaunt stared into Sturm’s blinking eyes.
“How you ever made general, I don’t know.”
Sturm seemed to sag.
“A weapon…” he said weakly.
“What?”
Sturm looked up with blazing eyes. “Give me a cursing weapon, colonel-commissar! I’ll not be lectured at by a
lowborn shit like you! Or punished! Give me a weapon and allow me the good grace of making my own peace!”
Gaunt shrugged. He pulled his bolt pistol from its holster and held it out butt-first to the general.
“Final request granted. Officers of the watch, so note General Sturm has volunteered to exact his own
punishment.” He looked back at Sturm. “I’ve never even slightly liked you, Noches. Give me a reason to speak of
you well. Make it clean and simple.”
Sturm took the proffered gun.
“Officers of the watch, also note,” hissed Sturm, “that Ibram Gaunt refuses to signal evacuation. He’s condemned
you all to death by fire. I’m glad to be out of it.”
He cocked the weapon and raised it to his mouth.
Gaunt turned his back.
There was a long pause.
“Gaunt!” Captain Daur screamed.
Gaunt swung around, the powersword of Heironymo Sondar already out and lit in his hand. It sliced through
Sturm’s wrist before the Volpone general could fire the bolt gun — the bolt gun that had been aimed at Gaunt’s skull.
Sturm fell sidelong on the baptistry flagstones, shrieking out as blood pumped from his wrist stump. Nerves
spasmed in his severed hand and the bolt pistol fired once, blowing a hole through the ornate prayer screen behind
Gaunt.
Gaunt glared down at the general’s writhing form for a moment. Then he stooped and retrieved his bolt pistol from
the detached hand.
“Get him out of my sight,” he told the waiting troopers with a dismissive gesture at Sturm. “I don’t want to look at
that treacherous bastard any longer than I have to.”
By early afternoon on that fateful thirty-fifth day, whatever co-ordinated resistance could be made was being made.
Gaunt’s command post in the Main Spine had contacted and tactically deployed almost two-thirds of the available
fighting strength in the hive, a feat of determined efficiency that left both the Administratum and the surviving officers
of the Vervun Primary Strategic Planning Cadre dumbfounded. What made it altogether more extraordinary was that
Gaunt had driven the work almost single-handedly. After the incident with Sturm, he worked with an intense
devotion that was almost terrifying. Latterly, as the cohesion of his plan became clear, he was able to delegate work
to the eager tactical staffers, but the core of the resistance plan was his alone.
Ban Daur stepped out of the baptistry a little after midday to clear his head and find water. He stood for a while
under a blackened arch at the end of the hallway, watching through glassless windows as flickering areas of warfare
boiled through the dense streets below.
Captain Petro, one of the tacticians, emerged from the baptistry too and came to stand with Daur, an old friend
from their academy days.
“He’s frightening…”Petro said.
“Gaunt?”
Petro nodded. “His mind, his focus… it’s like a codifier. All drive, all purpose.”
Daur sipped his glass. “Like Slaydo,” he said. Petro raised a quizzical eyebrow.
“Remember how we studied the warmaster’s career? The keynote was always Slaydo’s singularity of purpose —
that he could look at a theatre and plan it in his head, hold the whole situation in his mind. That was military
brilliance. I think we’re seeing its like again.”
“He served with Slaydo, didn’t he?”
“Yes. His record speaks for itself.”
“But as an infantry officer.” Petro frowned. “Gaunt’s reputation’s never been for overall battlefield command, not
on this scale.”
“I don’t think he’s ever had the chance to show it before — a commissar, a troop commander, always following
the lead of higher ranks. He’s never had an opportunity like this before. Besides… I think it may be because he’s got
everything to prove.”
“What the gak do you mean, Ban?”
“The high commanders are dead… or, like Sturm, disgraced. Fate and his own actions have put Gaunt in
command, and I think he’s determined to prove he should have been there all along.”
At a crossroads designated fg/567, in the heart of the eastern central habs, Bulwar’s infantry divisions were close to
breaking. They had no anti-armour ordnance left and the Zoican tank thrust was burning a spearhead through from
Croe Gate, laying waste to hectares of habitat structures.
Bulwar and his NorthCol battlegroup moved south around the crossroads, tackling Zoican troops in the rockcrete
tangles that had once been labour-homes. Tank rounds screamed down over them, blowing out sections of wall and
roadway, collapsing precarious spires of rubble and masonry.
In the shell of a funicular carriage station, between the ornate marble pillars and the old brass benches, they fought
at close quarters with a phalanx of Zoicans. More were pouring in through the ticket booths at the far end or climbing
up into the station through the shattered wreck of a carriage train that had made its last stop at the platform. Civilian
dead lay all around.
Bulwar led the attack, breaking body armour with his power claw and shooting with his autogun. Men fell around
him, too many to count. A las-round struck his shoulder and he was thrown backwards off his feet.
When he got up, things had changed. A fighting force had erupted into the station from the passenger exits and it
was tearing into the Zoicans from the side. They weren’t NorthCol or Vervun Primary or even Guard. They were
workers, hive labourers, armed with captured guns, axe-rakes, or any other weapon they could find. Bulwar realised
they were one of the many “scratch companies” informally raised by willing habbers to support the defence. He’d
heard of many emerging from the ruins to assist the Imperial forces, but not one of this size and organisation. Their
vengeful fury was astonishing.
The frenzied fighting lasted about eight minutes. Between them, Bulwar’s platoon and the workers killed every
Zoican in the station precinct.
There was cheering and whooping, and NorthCol troopers hugged Vervunhivers like lost brothers.
A short, thick-set worker with one eye, bedraggled in muck and blood, limped over to Bulwar and saluted.
“Who are you?” asked Bulwar.
“Soric, commander of the Smeltery Irregulars, sir!”
Bulwar couldn’t help smiling. The worker boss had a general’s pins, fashioned out of bottle caps, sewn into his
jacket.
“I thank the Emperor for you, General Soric.”
Soric paused and glanced bashfully at his insignia. “Sorry, sir; just a joke to rally the men. I’m just a plant
supervisor—”
“Who fights like a warmaster. How many are you?”
“About seven hundred, sir — workers, habbers, anyone really. We’ve been trying to do our bit for the hive ever
since the start, and when the Shield went down, it was run or fight.”
“You’d put us to shame.”
Soric frowned. “If we won’t fight for our own bloody hive, sir, I don’t know who should.”
Standing orders required all unit commanders to inform Spine Command of the size and composition of any
scratch companies encountered so that they could be designated a marker code and factored into the defence
structure. Bulwar called up his vox-officer and called in the details of Soric’s Irregulars. He looked to Soric. “We
need to co-ordinate, general. I thank the Emperor for the likes of you, but we’ll only win this thing if the military
forces and the civilian levies work as one. Get your men to spread the word. Scratch companies must try to make
contact with Imperial forces and be accounted for. They’ll have to take orders too.”
Soric nodded and called his “officers” up to brief them.
“You can’t be a general though, I’m afraid,” said Bulwar. Soric was already pulling his makeshift rank pins off.
“Take a brevet rank, Soric. State-of-emergency field promotion. You’re a sergeant now and you’ll answer to me.
Designate one man in every twenty a corporal, and fix a chain of command. You choose them; you know them.”
Soric nodded again, lost for words with pride.
Explosions thundered across the station, throwing some of the men to the ground. One of Soric’s freedom fighters
was yelling out. “Enemy tanks! Enemy tanks!”
Bulwar and Soric scrambled over to the station’s east entrance to see. The huge shapes of Zoican storm-tanks,
long-barrelled and heavily armoured, were scything in towards the station and the surrounding habs. Others,
including fast-moving light assault tanks and squat, super-heavy flamer platforms, were pushing round onto the transit
streets leading to the Commercia and the Shield Pylon.
“We have explosives, sir,” said Soric, saluting again for good measure. “Mining charges we lifted from the stores
behind the smelteries.”
“Static charges with no launchers… against tanks?”
“It’s how we’ve been doing it so far, sir: a man takes a wrap of charges and runs with it, anchors it to the tank hull
—”“
Suicide!”
Soric frowned. “Duty, sir. What other way is there?”
“How many tanks have you taken out with that method?”
“Twenty-four, I think.”
“How many men has it cost you?”
Soric shrugged. “Twenty-four, of course.”
Bulwar wiped his mouth on the back of his glove. Incredible. The devotion, the determination. The sacrifice. The
workers of Vervunhive, who had built this place with their sweat, were now buying it back with their blood. It was
an object lesson in loyalty and devotion that even the finest Imperial Guard regiment could admire.
The tanks were closing now, hammering the station, blowing sections of the overhead trackway down. Sheets of
fire leapt through the terminus hall.
“Throne of Earth!” Soric gasped, pointing.
Mustard-drab battle tanks, moving at full power across the rubble scarps, some of them bursting through sections
of wall, were thundering forward from the west. They were firing freely, with huge accuracy, maintaining a cycle
rate of fire that the Zoican armour, turning to the flank to greet them, couldn’t even begin to match.
Neither Bulwar nor Soric had ever seen a mass armour charge before, certainly not one undertaken by a crack
Imperial tank brigade like the Narmenians. They opened their mouths in awe, and nothing but wild cheers came out.
Grizmund called it “Operation Dercius.” He’d sent his sentinel recon units and foot-troop spotter units forward
towards Croe Gate as he composed his tank brigade in the Commercia. The spotters couldn’t fix the position of the
moving Zoican armour, but they could assess its force and direction. Grizmund had compiled the data and sent his
main columns first south into the habs and then turned them east at full speed, to catch the enemy’s flank. Grizmund
truly understood the power of armoured vehicles, not just the physical power, but the psychological strength. If a tank
was a threatening thing then a tank moving fast, and firing accurately and repeatedly, was a nightmare. The tank strike
was his forte and he only admitted into the Narmenian cadre drivers who could handle thirty-plus tonnes of armour at
speed, and gunners and layers who could fire fast, repeatedly and make kills each time.
In the command chair of The Grace of the Throne, Grizmund watched the picts on his auspex slate wink and flash
as they marked hits on the glowing target runes. The interior of the turret was a red-lit sweat-box, alive with the
chatter of the vox and the efficient call and return of the gun team. Fresh brass-stamped shells clanked down into the
greased loading rack from the magazine over the aft wheels, and the layer primed them and shunted them forward to
the gunner, who was hunting through the glowing green viewer of his scope. Every few seconds, the layer eased the
muzzle recoil brake and the main gun fired with a retort that shook the tank and welled smoke into the turret, smoke
quickly sucked out through the louvres of the outlets.
Grizmund’s driver, Wolsh, was one of the finest and he kept them moving even when firing. He had a master’s eye
for terrain and seemed to know exactly what to ram and what to steer around, what to drive over and what to avoid.
The Narmenians joked that Wolsh could smell a mine a kilometre off.
Operation Dercius threw forty fast-moving Narmenian heavy tanks down through fg/567 and cut through the neck
of the Zoican column spread. Grizmund’s forces had killed or crippled seventy-two enemy vehicles by the time they
doubled back, swinging around without breaking speed to re-engage the shattered Zoican armour from the other side.
By then, the Zoican armour was milling and fracturing in confusion.
Now came the part that required true skill, a manoeuvre Grizmund had dubbed The Scissors’. As his tanks came
around to re-engage, another fifty under Brigadier Nachin charged the enemy from the other side, from the direction
of Grizmund’s original strike. A textbook disaster in the hands of less able commanders, but at the turn, Grizmund’s
forces had begun to send identifying vox beacons to distinguish them from the enemy, and Nachin’s forces did the
same. The rule was anything caught between their charges that didn’t broadcast the correct beacon was a target.
Grizmund had used this tactic nine times before and never lost a tank to his own fire.
That fine record was maintained at Vervunhive. Like the jaws of some vast beast, the opposing Narmenian armour
charges tore in towards each other, crushing and destroying everything between them. Grizmund and Nachin’s
speeding tanks passed through each other’s ranks, some vehicles missing others at full speed by only a hull’s span.
And they had just begun. In the course of the thirty-fifth afternoon, the Narmenian divisions executed three more
precision scissor manouvres, looping back and forth onto each other, slowly chewing the head, neck and shoulders
off the vast Zoican incursion.
By four o’clock, the Zoicans had lost nearly two hundred tanks and armoured battle-hulks. The Narmenians had
lost only two.
By nightfall, the Narmenians had driven the Zoican armour back into the inner habs, less than ten kilometres from
Croe Gate, and cut a slice down the spearhead from Ontabi. With the routes behind them clear of enemy armour,
efforts to resupply the Imperial ground troops were now no longer suicidal. Labour forces of the Administratum, the
cargo guilds and Vervun Primary spread out in convoys and brought fresh ammunition to the dug-in infantry forces.
Many, like Bulwar’s, now resupplied with rockets, launchers and grenades, followed the Narmenian thrust out
towards the great eastern gates, killing every Zoican tank the Guard armour had missed.
Rising from his seat at the font-desk in the baptistry, Gaunt took the data-slate Petro held out to him and smiled a
weary smile as he read the reports of Grizmund’s sally. He felt… justified: justified in his faith in the general,
justified in fighting for him in the stockade, and justified in his tactical plans to hold the hive.
Towards Sondar Gate and Veyveyr, the position was less heartening. The NorthCol armour lacked the genius of
leadership or the combat-experienced skill that shone in the Narmenians. Major Clodel, commanding the NorthCol
units, had done little more than grind his tanks into a slugfest with the Zoican armour penetrating the hive from the
south. He had stopped them, though, halting them at the edge of the southern manufactories, and for that he would get
Gaunt’s commendation. But now a blistering, static tank-war raged through the southern skirts, and there was no
possibility of driving the invaders back and out or of sealing the gates. North of Veyveyr, the NorthCol were losing
as many tanks as they were destroying. Gaunt wished for another of Grizmund’s ilk to lead them, but he couldn’t
spare any of the Narmenians from the eastern repulse. He would be content with what he had.
And what he had was a shattered hive spared from the brink of defeat at the eleventh hour. He wasn’t winning, but
he wasn’t losing either. To the east, he was driving the foe out. To the south and west, he was holding them hard.
There was still a chance that they could win out and deny Heritor Asphodel and his Zoican zealots.
The baptistry hummed with activity and Gaunt wandered away into the side chapel as tacticians filled in for him at
the hololithic chart. Daur was orchestrating the command workforce. A good man, Gaunt thought, rising courageously
to his moment in Imperial history.
Can the same be said about me, he wondered?
The side chapel — a sacristy, peculiarly calm and softly lit given the apocalypse currently unleashed outside the
Spine walls — seemed to welcome him. He was dead on his feet with fatigue. He’d spent all day at a desk, with a
data-slate in one hand and a vox-horn in the other, and yet he’d fought the greatest and most exhausting battle of his
career so far. This was command, true high command, wretched with absolutes and finites. He pulled his newly
bestowed powersword from its sheath and leaned it on the edge of the gilt altar rail so he could sit down. Above
him, a great, golden statue of the Emperor glowered. The air was full of the continuing song of the Ecclesiarch.
He made no obeisance to the Emperor. He was too tired. He sat on a bench pew in the tiny chapel, removed his
cap and buried his face in his hands.
Gaunt thought of Oktar, Dercius, Slaydo and his father, the men who had moulded his life and brought him to this,
equipping him, each in their own way, with the skills he now used. He missed them all, missed their confidences and
strength. Oktar had trained him, and Gaunt had been at the great commissar-general’s side when he had passed,
wracked with ork poison on Gylatus Decimus, over twenty years before. Slaydo, the peerless warmaster — Gaunt
had been at his deathbed too, on Balhaut after the finest victory of all. Gaunt’s father had died far away when he was
still a child. And Dercius — bad, old Uncle Dercius; Gaunt had killed him.
But each, in their own way, had made him. Oktar had taught him command and discipline; Dercius: ruthlessness
and confidence; Slaydo: the merits of command and the selflessness of Imperial service. And his father? What he had
gleaned from his father was more difficult to identify. What a father leaves to his child is always the most
indefinable quality.
“Lord commander?”
Gaunt looked up from his reverie. Merity Chass, dressed in a simple, black gown of mourning, stood behind him
in the arch of the sacristy. She held something in her hands.
Gaunt got up. “Lady Chass?”
“I need to speak with you,” she began, “about my father.”
SIXTEEN
THE LEGACY
“That our beloved hive should be conquered, or should fall into the controlling hands of unwise or unfit masters,
I greatly fear and sadly anticipate. For this reason, I entrust this ultimate sanction to you. Use it wisely.”
—Heironymo Sondar, to Lord Chass
“It has been in the trust of my family since the Trade War,” she explained, her voice broken and exhausted.
Gaunt took the amulet from her hands and felt it purr and whisper between his fingers.
“Sondar made this?”
“It was his provision for the future. It is — in its own way — treachery.”
“Explain it again. I cannot see how this is treachery.”
Merity Chass looked up into Gaunt’s tired eyes fretfully.
“Vervunhive is a democratic legislative. The High Lord is voted in by his noble peers. It is written in the sacred
acts of constitution that absolute power should never be allowed to rest with any one individual who could not be
unseated by the Legislature should it become necessary.”
“Yet the hive has suffered under one individual: Salvadore.”
“Precisely the kind of evil Heironymo dreaded, commander. My father told me that after the Trade War, great
Heironymo wished to vouchsafe the future security of Vervunhive. Above all else, he feared a loss of control. That
an invader — or a ruler not fit for the role — would seize control of Vervunhive so entirely that nothing could unseat
him. What usurper or tyrant observes the mechanisms of constitution and law?”
Gaunt began to understand the far-reaching political dilemma attached to the device in his gloved hand. “So this
was his failsafe: the ultimate sanction, so very undemocratic, to be used when democracy was overturned?”
“And so you understand why it had to be a secret. Heironymo knew that by constructing such a device he would
lay himself open to accusations of tyranny and dictatorship.”
She gestured towards the amulet. “He made that and entrusted it to House Chass, whom he considered the most
humanitarian and neutral noble house. It was never made to fall into the hands of any ruler. It was the safeguard
against totalitarian rule.”
“And if House Chass became the High House?”
“We were to entrust it to another, as surety against our misuse of power.”
“And you give it to me?”
“You are the future of Vervunhive now, Gaunt. Why do you think my father made such efforts to evaluate you? He
needed to be certain such insurance would not be handed to one who might abuse it. He knew you were no tyrant in
the making, and I see that too. You are a soldier, true and brave, with nothing but the survival of our hive in your
dreams.”
“Your father died well, Merity Chass.”
“I am glad to hear it. Honour him and the duty borne by his house, Ibram Gaunt. Do not prove him wrong.”
Gaunt studied the amulet. It was a system-slayer and, from what the girl said, quite the most powerful and
formidable example of its kind he had ever heard of. In the time of Heironymo, House Sondar had specialised in
codifier systems and sentient cogitators, and they had enjoyed long-term trade partnerships and research pacts with
the tech-mages of the Adeptus Mechanicus. This was the masterpiece: in the event of anyone achieving total
technological mastery of Vervunhive, the activation of this amulet would annihilate the command and control
systems, erase all data and function programs, corrupt all codifiers and lobotomise all cogitators. It would cripple
Vervunhive and allow the device’s wielders to free the hive from would-be conquerors now rendered helpless.
In its peculiar way, it was more potent than atomics or a chapter of the Adeptus Astartes. It was an ultimate
weapon, forged for arenas of battle far beyond the remit of a dog-soldier like Gaunt. It was war on a refined,
decisive level, light years away from the mud and las-fire theatres that Gaunt regularly experienced.
Still, he understood it. But he didn’t like it. Such ancient high technology was a fearful thing, like psyker
witchcraft.
He set it down on the pew next to him. It gurgled and hummed, system patterns reconfiguring like sunlight on
moving water across its smooth casing.
“We don’t need it.”
Merity Chass stiffened and stared up at the stained-glass rosette of the sacristy.
“I was afraid you’d say that.”
She turned to face him. Her face was pale, and her eyes were angry and dark. Multi-coloured light from the
window behind her created a halo around her slim form. “My father agonised about using it. When I reached the
shelters and found he had hidden it in my belongings, I agonised too. Even as I came here to find you, I realised we
had left it too late. You have already unseated cursed Salvador. Our dire situation is no longer a matter of control.”
“We have control,” Gaunt agreed. “The problem is now simply one of physical warfare. Though Vervunhive
stands at the brink of doom, it is not the doom Heironymo feared or planned for with this.”
She sat down next to him, smouldering with rage. “If only I had brought it sooner — or urged my father to do the
same. We could have used it to overthrow Salvador—”
“Praise the Throne we did not!”
She glanced around at him sharply.
Gaunt shrugged. “We’d have crippled ourselves, crippled the hive systems, left ourselves with nothing to use to
regain control. A system-slayer is an absolute weapon, lady.”
“So, my soul-searching, my father’s painstaking deliberations… were all pointless anyway?” She laughed a thin,
scratchy laugh. “How fitting! House Chass, so gakking intellectual and refined, agonising over nothings while the
hive bleeds and burns!”
He pulled off his gloves and tossed them aside. “Heironymo’s legacy was never to be taken lightly. That we can’t
use it now does not reflect badly on the care and devotion with which House Chass held that trust.”
She reached out her hand and clasped his callused fingers. “What happens now, Gaunt?”
Slowly, he looked round at her. “We fight a simple war, men and machines, lasguns and shells. We fight and try to
drive them out. If we win, we live. If we lose, we die.”
“It sounds so bleak.”
“It’s all I know, the crude equation of battle. It’s not so bad. It’s simple at least. There’s no deliberation involved.”
“How long?”
“How long what?”
Her eyes, more alive than anything Gaunt had ever seen, gazed into his. “How long before we know?”
Ibram Gaunt exhaled deeply, shaking his head. “Just hours now. Perhaps a day, perhaps two. Then it will be over,
one way or another.”
She pulled him to her, her arms stretched tightly around his broad back. He could smell her hair and her perfume,
faint and almost worn away but still tangible despite the odours of cold and damp and dirt she had been exposed to
in the shelters.
Gaunt had long forgotten the simple consolation of another’s body warmth. He held her gently, swimming with
fatigue, as the low voices of the Ecclesiarch choir ebbed through the sacristy. Her mouth found his.
He pulled back. “I don’t think—” he began.
“A common soldier messing with a high-born lady?” She smiled. “Even if that mattered once, it doesn’t now. This
war has made us all equals.”
They kissed again, neither resisting. For a while, their passion was all that mattered to either of them. Two human
souls, intimate and wordless, shutting the apocalypse out.
Midnight was long past. Bray’s Tanith units, after a day and night of tank-busting in the slag-reaches of the chem plant
district, fell back through the battered central hab zone towards the Shield Pylon. All the Zoican southern efforts
seemed to be directed at the pylon and Bray knew that its strategic importance was unmatched by anything in the
hive. Bray had about two hundred and eighty Tanith left, augmented by four hundred more Vervun Primary, Volpone,
Roane and NorthCol stragglers, plus around six hundred hivers. The hivers were mostly non-coms, who looked to
the troops for protection, and Bray and his colleague officers found themselves managing more of a refugee exodus
than a troop retreat.
But some of the hivers had consolidated into scratch units, adding about one hundred and seventy fighting bodies
to Bray’s forces.
More than half of the scratch companies were made up of women, and Bray was amazed. He’d never seen women
fight. Back on Tanith war was a masculine profession. But he couldn’t deny their determination. And he understood
it. This was their fething home, after all.
Bray’s immediate command chain was formed by Vervun Primary and NorthCol, but though some of them
outranked him, they looked to him for leadership. Bray suspected this was because Gaunt was now field commander.
Everyone deferred to the Tanith now the endgame had begun.
Shells from Zoican armour whooped over his head and Bray sprinted into a trench-stretch between a blown-out
meat-curing plant and a guild estate mansion. In the trench, Sergeant Zweck of the NorthCol and Major Bunce of the
Vervun Primary were directing the men around the curing plant to engage the enemy’s forward push.
Las-fire zagged down at them. Most of the Imperial shooters fired from shallow foxholes at the ranks of Zoican
assault troops advancing, bayonets fixed, across the rubble. Mortar shells rebounded off the rockcrete slag and
exploded as airbursts, causing significantly more damage.
Behind the toppling lines of Zoican infantry, tanks rumbled in, many carrying troops clinging to the hull netting like
apes.
Bray fired his weapon over the trench lip. Beside him, Zweck was decapitated by air-burst splinters. Blood
saturated the side of Bray’s dark fatigues.
He reached for another clip.
“What are their names?” Caffran yelled over the pounding thunder of the tanks. He had Yoncy under one arm and was
leading Dalin by the hand. Tona hurried after him.
Scratch companies to their west were holding the Zoican front back, and they were struggling to keep up with a
straggle of civilian refugees fleeing into the northern sectors. Caffran yelled again.
Tona Criid was busy and didn’t answer Caffran.
She was firing her laspistol at the Zoican assault troops crossing into the street behind her. But she was in trouble.
There was no one to cover her.
“Hold tight to your sister and get down!” Caffran cried at Dalin, pressing the swaddled baby into the boy’s arms.
“I’m going back for your mother!”
“She’s not my mother. She’s Auntie Tona,” said Dalin.
Caffran glanced back confused and then ran on as lasbursts flickered around him.
He fired his lasgun wildly and dropped into the shell-hole where Tona cowered.
“Fresh clip!” she called.
He tossed her one. Reloaded, both rose and sent a stinging waft of kill-fire down the street at the Zoicans. Ochre
bodies crumpled.
“Good shots. You’re scary, Tona.”
“I do what I do. Fresh clip!”
He tossed her another.
“So they aren’t yours? I thought you looked too young.”
Tona swung round to him, her face hard. “They’re all I have! Gak you! You won’t take them from me, and neither
will these bastards!”
She swung up and fired her gun, killing one, two, three…
Savage fighting continued unabated on all fronts right through into the early hours of the thirty-sixth day. By then, two
thirds of the hive’s immense civilian population were packed into the north-eastern sectors and docks, making
desperate efforts to flee to the north bank. The flow was far beyond the abilities of the river ferries to manage.
Working through the night, with only brief pauses to refuel, boats like the Magnificat shuttled back and forth across
the Hass. Over two million refugees were now in the outhabs of the north shore or clogging the Northern Collective
Highway. The night was cold and wet, and many — wounded, shocked, or unfed — suffered with exposure and
fever.
In the hive it was worse. Millions choked the approaches to the wharves or lined the river in ranks as thick as the
crowds on the terraces of the stadium watching a big game. Brutal battles broke out as citizens fought to win places
on the approaching boats. Thousands died, almost two hundred of them aboard a ferry that they overloaded and
capsized in a panic rush to get aboard. Hundreds more were trampled or simply crushed in the press or were pushed
into the river by the mounting weight of bodies behind them. Those that didn’t drown immediately died slowly,
floundering in the cold of the water, unable to find enough room on the docks to clamber back ashore. An entire pier
stretch collapsed under the weight of the refugees, spilling hundreds into the Hass. Rioting and panic fighting spread
like wildfire back through the crowds. Like a wounded, enraged animal, Vervunhive began to claw and tear at itself.
Every small boat or craft that could be found was stolen and put to the water, usually overfilled and often guided
by men or women with no idea of watercraft. Hundreds of others elected to try to swim or paddle across, clinging to
packing bales or other items of floating material. The Hass was almost three kilometres wide, icy cold and plagued
with strong currents. No one who tried to swim made it more than halfway before perishing, except for a very few
who were pulled out of the water by passing ferry crews.
Streams of evacuees made it up from the docks onto the great viaduct and crossed on foot. The density of foot
traffic on the railbridge was so great that many were pushed off and fell screaming into the river far below. Just after
midnight, Zoican rockets ranged down the dock basin from the invading forces at the Hiraldi Bridge end to the east.
Some fell on the docks or hit the water. Four blew out the central spans of the viaduct, toppling three of the great
brick pier supports and killing hundreds. The viaduct as an evacuation route was finished, and those pressed on to
the southern spans who had survived the rocket strike were trapped, unable to retreat back into the hive and reach the
docks because the pressure of bodies behind them was so great. One by one, they were pushed off the shattered end
of the viaduct.
A little after the destruction of the railbridge, Folik, steering his ferry on a return run across the Hass, saw lights
and movement on the north shore to the east. Zoican motorised brigades were sweeping in along the far shore from
the pipelines and the Hiraldi road, pincering round to deny the escape route. The Zoicans clearly intended no one
should survive the destruction of the hive. By dawn, the Zoican army groups were assaulting the tides of refugees on
the north bank. The hordes who had been lucky enough to get across the river were now systematically massacred on
the far side. Perhaps as many as half a million were slaughtered outright. Hundreds of thousands fled, their numbers
dissipating into the inhospitable hinterlands or the ruined outhabs.
Now there was no way across. The ferries returned to the south docks, many under fire from Zoican forces on the
north side, and tied up. They were as trapped as the hosts on the banks now. A fearful hush of realisation fell across
the multitude when they saw flight was no longer an option. The Zoicans began to fire across the river into the tightly
packed refugees. Despite the wholesale killing, it was a matter of hours before the civilian masses began to draw
back into the hive. It took that long for the message to filter back through the press of humanity to adjust their tidal
flow.
Folik sat with Mincer on the foredeck of the rocking Magnificat, sharing a bottle of joiliq. They had decided not
to flee. There seemed little point, especially now they were both roaring drunk. Sporadic enemy fire from across the
Mass stippled the waters around them and smacked off the hull. Parts of the docks were ablaze now. Folik expected
a rocket or mortar to blow them out of the water at any moment. He fetched another bottle from the wheelhouse and a
las-round punched straight through the cabin window and out the other side over his shoulder as he stooped to reach
into the steerage locker. It made him laugh. He stumbled back to Mincer. They decided to see if they could finish the
bottle before they were killed.
Hass West Fort was encircled by the enemy and under siege. By dawn, it was close to destruction. Shells and rockets
rattled into it from outside the Curtain Wall, and enemy troops and light armour pounded it from the manufactories
and habs within. Captain Cargin, badly wounded, held his men together, barely six hundred of the five thousand with
which he had started the night. There were virtually no gunners or artillerymen left alive, but that hardly mattered
because all the munitions for the Wall and fort gun emplacements and missile racks were spent. The Vervun Primary
troopers and their lasguns were all that remained. The fort itself was rattled with damage and lower levels were
blocked or ablaze.
Cargin adjusted his spiked helmet and limped down the gate battlement, urging his men with a voice hoarse from
hours of shouting. The rockcrete deckways were littered with dead. One of his men, Corporal Anglon, called to him.
Through the smoke and flame, he had sighted something approaching through the outer habs.
Cargin took a look. Through his scope, he saw a colossal shape crawling through the suburb ruins fifteen
kilometres south of the fort. Another death machine, he thought instinctively.
But this was different — larger, slower. A huge pyramid structure, five hundred metres high at the apex, its
mechanical sides painted Zoican ochre and decorated with vast, obscene symbols of Chaos. It moved, as far as he
could see, on dozens of fat, wide-gauge caterpillar units that crushed everything in its path. A gouged trail half a
kilometre wide scored through the habs in its wake. Its flanks bristled with weapon turrets and emplacements, and
huge, brass speaker-horns on its summit, with Chaos banners fluttering from poles between them, boomed out the
Heritor chant and crackled the inhuman chatter.
“What is it?” Anglon hissed.
Cargin shrugged. He was cold and weak from blood-loss and pain. Every word, movement, or thought was an
effort of superhuman concentration. He unstrapped the handset of the vox-unit he had been carrying over his shoulder
since his comm-officer had been killed some hours before.
“Cargin/Hass West to Baptistry Command. Marker code 454/gau.”
“Received and recognised, Hass West.”
“We’ve got something out here, approaching the walls. Massive mechanised structure, mobile, armed. I’m only
guessing, but unless there’s more than one of these things, I’d lay real money it’s the enemy’s command centre. I’ve
never seen a mobile unit so big.”
“Understood, Hass West. Can you supply visuals?”
“Pict-links are down, Command. You’ll just have to take my word for it.”
“What is your situation, Hass West? We are trying to direct troop forces to support you.”
Cargin sighed. He was about to tell Baptistry Command he had less than a thousand men left, most of them
wounded, at the end of their ammo supplies, with no artillery support, and an ocean of enemy on all sides. He was
about to estimate they could hold on another hour at the most.
The estimate would have been inaccurate by fifty-nine and a half minutes. Anglon grabbed Cargin’s arm, shouting
out as fierce lights blinked and fizzled in dark recesses down the centre of the pyramid side facing them. The vast
Zoican vehicle shuddered and then retched huge, searing beams of plasma energy at Hass West Fort: cutting beams,
like the ones that had dissected Ontabi Gate, but larger still and far more powerful, energy weapons of a scale
usually seen in the fleet engagements of naval flagships. The roar was deafening, sending out a Shockwave that was
felt kilometres away.
Hass West Fort and the gate it protected were obliterated. Cargin, Anglon and all the remaining defenders were
disintegrated in one blinding instant. As the cutting beams faded, rocket and gunnery platforms all across the pyramid
opened fire and piled destruction on the ruins. The air stank with ozone and static and fycelene. For half a kilometre
in each direction, the Curtain Wall collapsed.
The pyramid machine began to trundle forward again, inching towards the dying hive, blaring the Heritor’s name
over and again.
Gaunt woke with a start, his mind spinning. Sleep had taken away his immediate fatigue, but every atom of his body
ached and throbbed. It took him a moment to remember where he was. How long had he been asleep?
He clambered to his feet. The sacristy was chilly and silent, the Ecclesiarch choir long since finished.
Merity Chass stood nearby, gazing at the friezes of the Imperial cult. She wore his long overcoat and nothing else.
She looked round at him and smiled. “You’d better get dressed. They probably need you.”
Gaunt recovered his shirt and boots and pulled them on. He could still taste her on his lips. He stared at her for a
moment more. She was… beautiful. If he didn’t have a reason to fight for Vervunhive before, he did now. He would
not allow this girl to perish.
He sat down on the pew and laughed to himself dryly.
“What?” she asked.
Gaunt shook his head. Such thoughts! He had committed the cardinal sin of any good officer. He’d placed his
emotions in the firing line. Even now, he could hear Oktar’s dirty chuckle in his mind, scolding him for becoming
attached to anyone or anything. Over the years they had spent campaigning together, Gaunt had seen Oktar leave many
tearful women behind as he moved on to the next warzone.
“Don’t get involved, Ibram, not with anything. If you don’t care, you won’t care, and that makes the hardest parts
of this army life that much easier. Do what you must, take what you need and move on. Never look back, never regret
and never remember.”
Gaunt buttoned his shirt. He realised, perhaps for the first time, that he had broken with Oktar’s advice a long time
since. When he had met the Tanith and had brought them as Ghosts from the deathfires of their world, he had started
to care. He decided he didn’t see it as a weakness. In that one thing, old Oktar had been wrong. Caring for the
Ghosts, for the cause, for the fight, or for anyone, made him what he was. Without those reasons, without an
emotional investment, he would have walked away or put a gun-muzzle in his mouth years before.
Gaunt got to his feet and found his cap, his gloves and his weapon belt.
He was trying to remember the furious notions that had woken him. Ideas, whirling…
Daur burst into the sacristy. “Commissar! Sir, we—” Daur saw the naked woman cloaked in the overcoat and
stopped in his tracks. He turned away, flushing.
“A moment, captain.”
Gaunt crossed to Merity.
“I must go. When this is over—”
“We’ll either be dead, or we’ll be a noble lady and a soldier once again.”
“Then I thank the Emperor for this precious interlude of equality. Until the hour of my death, however far away
that is, I will remember you.”
“I should hope so. And I hope that hour is a long time coming.”
He kissed her mouth, stroked his fingers down her cheek, and then followed Daur out of the sacristy, pulling on his
jacket and weapon-harness. At the door, he put on his cap and adjusted the metal rose Lord Chass had given him for
honour. It was drooping in his lapel and he straightened it.
“Sorry, sir,” Daur said as Gaunt followed him down the hall.
“Forget it, Ban. You should have woken me earlier.”
“I wanted to give you all the rest you could get, sir.”
“What’s the situation now?”
“A holding pattern as before. Intense fighting on all fronts. The enemy has taken the north shore. And Hass West
fell a few minutes ago.”
“Damn!” Gaunt growled. They strode into the bustle of the Baptistry Command Centre. Additional cogitators and
vox-sets had been added over night. Over three hundred men and women from Vervun Primary, the Administratum
and the guilds now crewed them, working in concert with dozens of servitors. Major Otte was occupying “the Font,”
as the command station was now known. Intendant Banefail and members of his elite staff assisted the major.
Many saluted as Gaunt entered the chamber. He acknowledged the greetings while taking in the details of the main
hololithic display.
“Just before it fell, Hass West reported seeing a massive mobile structure moving in towards them. We’re fairly
sure it is their main command vehicle.”
Gaunt spotted the marker on the display. The thing was certainly huge, and now close to the western extremity of
the Wall. “The marker code… ‘spike’?”
Banefail joined them. The distinguished lord was almost dead on his feet with fatigue. “My fault, commissar. I
referred to it as a bloody great spike, and the word stuck.”
“It’ll do. What do we know about it?”
“It’s a massive weapon, but slow moving,” Major Otte said, crossing the floor to Gaunt. “I guess we can assume
it’s well armoured too.”
“What makes you think it’s the command element?”
“It’s the only one we’ve sighted,” Daur said, “and its size clearly indicates its importance.”
“More than that,” Banefail said, gesturing at a vox-set manned by a female Administratum cleric, two servitors
and a withered astropath. “It’s the source of the chatter.”
Gaunt glanced at the woman operating the set. She dialled up the speaker and the air filled briefly with the coded,
incessant growl of the enemy.
“The enemy vox-traffic unites them all,” lisped the pallid astropath thickly. Gaunt tried not to look at him and the
festoon of data-plugs stapled into his translucent scalp. The astropath lifted a bionically augmented, wasted limb and
pointed to data runes flashing across the instrumentation.
“We knew it was coming from outside the hive and we suspected the source was Zoica. But it’s mobile now and
audio scans confirm it is being emitted by that structure.”
Gaunt nodded to himself. “Asphodel.”
Banefail glanced around at the name. “He’s there? So close?”
“It matches his recorded behaviour. The Heritor likes to be near to his triumphs, and he likes to maintain intense
control. He commands by charisma, intendant. Where his legions march, we will not find him far behind.”
“Golden Throne…” Otte murmured, looking at the display with frightened eyes.
Gaunt forced himself to look at the astropath. The stink of the warp hung about the cadaverous wretch. “Your
opinion? This chatter: could it be the control signal of the Zoican forces? An addictive broadcast that maintains the
Heritor’s hold over his zealots?”
“It is certainly patterned and hypnotic. I find myself reluctant to listen to it for any length of time. It is a Chaos
pulse. Though we can’t — daren’t — interpret its meaning, the flow of the enemy troops and armour seems to match
its rhythmic fluctuations.”
Gaunt turned away, deep in thought. The idea that had woken him reformed in his mind.
“I have a notion,” he told Daur, Otte and Banefail. “Send word to Major Rawne’s units and to Sergeant Mkoll and
his scout platoon.” He ordered other preparations to be made, and then told Daur to fetch him a fresh box of bolter
shells.
“Where are you going? We need you here, sir!” stammered Otte.
“You have my full confidence, major,” Gaunt said. He gestured to the hololithic display. “The defence strategies
are set in motion. You and this staff are more than able to direct them. I’m a foot soldier. A warrior, not a warmaster.
It’s time I did my job, the job I’m best at. And with the grace of the Emperor shining on me, I may take this field yet.”
Gaunt took Heironymo’s amulet from his pocket and felt it whisper and chuckle in his hand. The flickering light
patterns on its carapace roiled like the twisting flashes of the Immaterium.
“In my absence, Otte and Daur have field command. If I fail to return, intendant, you should signal Warmaster
Macaroth and plead for salvation. But I believe it won’t come to that.”
The amulet gurgled and quivered.
This could work, thought Gaunt. God-Emperor save us, this could fething work!
SEVENTEEN
OPERATION HIERONYMO
“I believe this Gaunt fellow is singularly overrated.”
—General Noches Sturm to Major Gilbear, during the assault on Voltemand
A scratch company met them at 281/kl to guide them in. The company was forty strong and had been conducting
guerrilla work in the southern outer habs before the Shield fell. Their leader, a powerful, saturnine ex-miner called
Gol Kolea, saluted Gaunt as he approached. Gaunt looked every centimetre a leader, though the braid of his cap had
been rubbed with ash to dull its glint. He wore the powersword at his waist and his boltgun in a holster across his
chest, under a short, black, leather jacket. On top of that, draped expertly as Colm Corbec had instructed him during
the first days of the Ghost regiment’s existence, was his Tanith stealth cape.
The roar of battle thundered down the ruined streets beside them, but this sector was clear and quiet. Cold,
morning light filtered in through the crackling Shield. Gaunt signalled his units up to join Kolea’s scratch company:
thirty men, all Tanith, pale-skinned, dark-haired warriors in black fatigues and stealth capes, their skin decorated
with various, blue tattoo symbols. They were the cream of Rawne’s unit and the pride of Mkoll’s stealth scouts.
Amongst them, Bragg, Larkin, Domor, MkVenner, Dremmond, Genx, Neskon, Cocoer, the medic Gherran — most of
the very best.
Gaunt was beginning to outline “Operation Heironymo” to his waiting squad when Rawne heard movement down
a side street. The Ghosts and scratches fanned out and made ready, arming weapons freshly supplied for the mission.
A fireteam of ten Volpone advanced down the side street, led by Colonel Gilbear. They were all Volpone elite
troops from the 10th: massive, carapace-armoured and holding hellguns ready.
Gaunt walked out into the rubble-strewn open to meet Gilbear. They saluted each other.
“Not going in without the Bluebloods, I hope, colonel-commissar?” Gilbear said archly.
“I wouldn’t dream of it, colonel,” Gaunt replied. “I’m glad you got my message and gladder still you found your
way here. Join us. We’re about to move out.”
Gaunt crossed to Rawne and Kolea as the Volpone meshed into the column spread.
“I don’t fething believe you invited them,” Rawne cursed.
“Keep your thoughts to yourself, major. The Bluebloods may be bastards, but I feel I have reached an
understanding with them. Besides, we’ll need their muscle when it comes to it.”
Rawne spat in the puddles and made no reply.
“I understand you’re command now,” Kolea said bluntly to Gaunt. “May I ask what the gak you’re doing here?
Gnide and Croe never got their hands dirty.”
“Their command ethic was different, Kolea. I hope you’ll appreciate my method of doing things.”
“Can you sign?”
“What?”
“Most of my company are deaf. Can you sign your commands?”
“I can, sir,” Mkoll piped up.
Gaunt gestured to the scout sergeant. “Mkoll can relay my instructions to your fighters. Good enough?”
Gol Kolea scratched his cheek. “Perhaps.”
Gaunt could tell Kolea had been through hell in the last thirty-odd days. Courage and determination seemed to
ooze out of him like sweat. He was not a man Gaunt wanted to be on the wrong side of.
They followed dingy, battle-worn streets out through the southern extremities of the hive, and they left the shattered
Curtain Wall behind them. Mkoll’s scouts led the way, directed by Kolea’s troops. The bulky Volpone struggled to
keep up with the swift, silent advance. Clear of the Shield, they were all exposed to the bitter rain.
“You know these quarters well, Kolea. I guess they were your home,” Gaunt remarked softly to the miner.
“Correct. Just half a kilometre from here, I could take you to the crater where my hab once stood.”
“You lost family?”
“A wife, two children. I don’t know they’re dead, but — gak! What are the chances?” Gaunt shrugged.
“How many did you lose coming here?” Kolea asked. “Troops?”
Kolea shook his head. “Family.”
“I didn’t have any to lose. I don’t know which of us is luckier.” Kolea smiled, but without any light or laughter in
his face. “Neither one, commissar. And that’s the tragedy.”
“I don’t know about the girls,” Larkin muttered as they moved through the scorched-out, rain-pelted ruins. Bragg, his
missile launcher and autocannon slung over his shoulders, raised his eyebrows and made no reply. There were eight
females in Kolea’s scratch company, none older than twenty-five. Each held a captured Zoican lasgun or a Vervun
Primary autorifle and carried an equipment pack over their ragged work fatigues. Most of them, like the men, wore
salvaged military boots wadded with socks and wrapped tight with puttees made of cargo tape to keep them fast. The
women moved as silently and as surely as their male comrades. A month of intense guerrilla war in the outhabs had
trained them well. Those that had not learned had not made it.
“Women can fight,” Rilke murmured, holding his sniper rifle with the stock high in his armpit and the long barrel
pointing downwards. “My sister, Loril, used to hold her own against the rowdies when it got to chucking-out time in
my father’s tavern back home. Feth, but she could throw a punch!”
“That’s not what I meant,” growled Larkin, rain dripping off his thin nose. “It doesn’t seem right, sending women
in like this, all gussied up in combat gear and waving lasguns. I mean, they’re just girls. This is gonna get nasty. No
place for women.”
“Keep it down!” Dremmond hissed, lugging his flamer with its weighty, refilled tanks. “They’ll hear you, Larks!”
“You heard what that big, bastard miner said. They’re all shell-deaf! I can speak my mind without insulting no
one! They can’t hear me!”
“But we can read lips, Tanith,” Banda said, moving past the chief sniper with a smirk. Some of the other scratches
nearby laughed.
“I — I didn’t mean nothing by it,” Larkin began, moving his mouth over-emphatically to make sure she could hear.
Banda looked back at him, a mocking expression on her dirty face.
“And anyway, I’m not deaf. Neither’s Muril. And neither are the Zoicans. So why don’t you clamp it and do us all
a favour?”
They moved on, the eighty-strong assault group splashing down a damp, debris-strewn side road.
“That told you,” Dremmond whispered to Larkin.
“Shut up,” Larkin replied.
MkVenner scouted ahead as part of Mkoll’s recon deployment. In his immediate field of vision was Scout Bonin and
the scratch company guides: a girl called Nessa and a Vervun Primary sergeant named Haller, who was second in
command of Kolea’s makeshift group. Haller was one of nine Vervun Primary survivors to have found their way into
the scratch company, though with his dirty, patched uniform and the woollen cap he wore in place of his spiked
helmet, he didn’t look much like a Primary infantryman anymore. He seemed content to be commanded by a miner
rather than a military officer. MkVenner knew the members of the scratch company had weathered the very worst of
the war, and he couldn’t begin to understand their loyalties or the circumstances that had brought them together.
Nessa guided them through a series of torched manufactories, covering the ground quickly, keeping low and
making curt, direct gestures they could read easily. They crossed an arterial highway where the rockcrete was
crumpled by a series of shell-holes, and they skirted the wrecks of two Zoican battletanks and an infantry carrier that
had been flipped over onto its back.
Across the highway, they fanned through textile mills where the constant rain trickled in through the holed roofs
and rows of iron-framed looms stood silent and shattered. The loose ends from hundreds of bales of twine rippled in
the breeze. MkVenner stopped in a doorway and scanned around. He watched with idle fascination as droplets of
rainwater crept down taut feed-threads over one loom, glinting like diamonds and thickening before dripping off the
hanging brass bobbin onto the weaving frames beneath.
MkVenner realised he’d lost sight of the woman. Haller appeared behind him.
“You have to watch her,” Haller mouthed, signing at the same time. He knew full well MkVenner could hear, but
the practise was now instinctive.
Bonin joined them and they edged down the length of the mill, until they found Nessa in an open loading dock at
the far end, crouched behind an overturned bale-lifter. Outside, in the bright, thin light of the cargo yard, a quintet of
Zoican flamer tanks grumbled by, heading north. The foot soldiers could smell the coarse stench of the promethium
lapping in the tanks’ heavy bowsers.
Once the tanks had passed, Nessa made a punching motion in the air and the troops hurried on, across the open
yard and into the razorwire-edged enclosure of a guild’s freight haulage plant. The rusting bulks of overhead cranes
and hoists creaked in the wind above them. Rainwater had formed wide, shallow lakes across the rockcrete apron.
They moved past rows of plasteel cargo crates and produce hoppers flaking paint. Near the haulage site office, a
small Imperial chapel built for the workers had been desecrated by the advancing Zoicans. They’d shot out the
windows and soiled the walls with excrement. A dozen site workers had been crucified along the front porch on
gibbets made from rail sleepers. The bodies were little more than ghastly, stringy carcasses now. They’d been nailed
up three weeks before, and the steady rain and the carrion birds had done their best to erode the flesh.
Haller’s boot clipped an empty bottle and the noise of it tinkling away across the ground startled the birds, who
rose in cawing, raucous mobs, revealing the gristly horrors beneath. Some of the birds were fat, glossy-black
scavengers, the others dirty-white seabirds from the estuary with clacking pincer-bills. Black and white, the birds
made a brief checker pattern in the air before flocking west to the haulage barn roof and settling. The open ground
was peppered and sticky with their droppings.
There was a break in the fence behind the chapel. MkVenner held position long enough to check, via microbead,
that the main force was within range behind them. Gaunt and the column were just entering the haulage site.
The land south of the freight-holding was a mass of chalky rubble and sprouting weeds. There were dark driver
holes in the ground at intervals and the area was littered with thousands of gleaming, brass shell cases. In an earlier
stage of the war, massive Zoican field pieces had been braced here, trained at the Wall. MkVenner was about to
move on, but Nessa stopped him.
He made the gesture for question, and she signed and mouthed back at him.
“In our experience, the Zoicans trap-wire their sites when they move on.”
MkVenner nodded. He signalled back and Gaunt sent Domor forward. Haller helped Domor lock his sweeper set
together, and then the Ghost began to creep away from them, playing the head of the broom back and forth over the
dirt. Domor liked to do this work by sound and MkVenner smiled to see him dosing the shutters of his bionic ocular
implants by hand. The time when Domor could simply close his eyelids was long passed, way back on Menazoid
Epsilon.
Domor had a path cleared in under five minutes, playing out a fibre-cord to mark its zigzag path. By the time he
had finished, the assault force had caught up with them and were waiting with MkVenner, Haller, Nessa and Bonin at
the fence.
“He found nothing?” asked Haller, pointing over at Domor on the far side of the area.
“No, he found plenty, but we’re not here to mine-lift. Follow the cord,” replied MkVenner.
Single file, the eighty soldiers crossed the ex-artillery emplacement and moved down along a reinforced walkway
that crossed one of the hive’s main drainage gullies. Swollen by the heavy rains, the gully was in full flood. It was
partially dammed in places by slews of debris rubbish and bundles of corpses.
Up the other side, they climbed the chute slope by a metal stairway and hurried in small packs across another
highway. The ruined remains of bodies littering the road stretched as far as the eye could see. Most tried not to look.
Larkin stared in horrified fascination as he crossed the road. Nothing more than bundles of rags, the bodies were
those of workers and habbers slaughtered as they had tried to flee inwards towards Vervunhive. They had fallen
weeks before, and no one had touched or moved them, except tire mashing tracks of Zoican war machines heading
north towards their target.
Gaunt called a halt-period in the broken habitats on the far side of the highway. His motley brigade set up defence
watches all around as he climbed to the third storey of a hab block with Kolea and Gilbear.
“I smell smoke,” Gilbear said suddenly. He moved ahead, down the dirty, dank hallway, his weapon raised, and
kicked open the rotting door of a worker flat.
Gaunt and Kolea, weapons ready, moved in behind him. All three stopped short.
The flat was thick with trash and overrun with vermin. The smoke issued from a small fire set in a tar bucket over
which swung a metal pot on a wire frame that had once been a clothes hanger. The five inhabitants of the room, a
mother with three children and a much older woman, cowered in the far corner. They were emaciated and filthy, just
terrified skin and bone clad in dirty tatters. The old woman whined like a caged animal and two of the children cried
silently The mother, her eyes bright and fierce in her soot-black face, held out a shank of metal, sharpened to a point.
“Back off! Now!” Gaunt told Kolea and Gilbear, though Kolea needed no urging.
“It’s all right… I’m sorry” Gaunt told the mother, his hands raised, open. The shank remained pointing at him.
“Leave them,” Kolea said. He pulled a wad of ration cakes from his pack and went over, dropping them on the
floor in front of the group when the mother refused to take them.
They went back out into the hallway and Kolea pulled the door back into place.
“Throne of Earth…” Gaunt hissed, shaking his head.
“Quite,” joined Gilbear. “What a waste of rations.”
Gaunt looked round at him, began to speak, and then just shook his head. Explaining the real nature of his horror to
Gilbear might take a lifetime.
And that time, however it could be measured, was all Gaunt had left to do something far more important than drum
compassion into an aristocratic warrior like the Blueblood colonel.
Kolea had heard Gilbear’s remark and he glowered at the man with utter disdain. Kolea doubted even the colonelcommissar
understood what it was like to claw and scrape for survival in the shelled ruins of your home, day after
day. Gol Kolea had seen enough of that misery since the Zoicans came, enough to last a hundred lifetimes. There
were thousands of hab families out here still, slowly dying from starvation, disease and cold.
The trio of officers climbed out onto a fire escape at the eastern end of the hab block, and Gaunt and Gilbear
pulled out their scopes.
Five kilometres south, across the ruins, through the smoke and rain, rose the bulk of the Spike. It was moving at a
slow crawl, up towards the main hive. Gaunt swung his scope around and looked back at the vast, glinting dome of
the Shield and the massive Spine and hab structures within.
Gaunt offered his scope to Kolea, but the man wasn’t interested. Gilbear gestured, suddenly and sharply, to them
both and pointed down at the highway below, the one they had just crossed. A host of Zoican troopers, escorted by a
vanguard of carriers and light tanks, was advancing towards them. Chaos banners flopped lankly in the rain and the
light shone off the wet, ochre-coloured armour.
Gilbear raised his hellgun, about to turn, but Gaunt stopped him. “We’re not here to fight them. Our fight is
elsewhere.”
The commissar keyed his microbead. “Mass enemy formation approaching along the highway outside. Stay low
and stay silent.”
Rawne voxed back an acknowledgement.
It took half an hour for the Zoican column to go by. Gaunt estimated there were a little over two thousand foot
troops and sixty armoured vehicles — reserves, advancing to bolster the assault. He wished to the Emperor himself
he had reserves of such numbers to call upon. Feth, he wished he had such strengths in his active units!
Once the column was safely past and clear, the Operation Heironymo assault cadre left the habitats and moved on
through rain-swilled ruins, towards the Spike.
The closer they got, the bigger it grew, dwarfing all the building structures around. Larkin bit back deep unease — it
was big, so fething big! How in the name of feth were eighty souls going to take on a thing that size?
They were cowering in rubble. Larkin raised his head and saw Banda grinning back at him.
“Scared yet, Tanith?” she hissed.
Larkin shook his head and looked away.
Mkoll, MkVenner and Gaunt moved forward with Kolea, Rawne and Haller in a line behind them. Now they could
hear the throbbing grind of the Spike’s enormous track sections, the deep growl of its engines. Gaunt noticed dust and
ash trickling down the rubble around him in sharp, rhythmic blurts. He realised the vast machine, still a kilometre
distant, was vibrating the earth itself with its weight and motivation.
The rain grew suddenly heavier. An incessant patter filled the air around them, accompanied by a regular, tinking
chime. It came from a broken bottle wedged in a spill of bricks, sounding every time a raindrop hit its broken neck.
Gaunt wiped water droplets from the end of his scope and studied the Spike.
“How do we do this?” he asked Mkoll.
Mkoll frowned. “From above. Let’s get ahead and find a suitable habitat overlook — unless it changes course.”
Gaunt took the group across the wide, pulverised trail behind the advancing Spike, a half-kilometre strip of soil
and ash compressed by the vehicle’s weight into glinting carbon. The Spike didn’t steer around buildings. It flattened
them, making its own path.
The Imperial strikeforce overtook the great war machine on the right flank and pressed ahead, hugging the ruins
and the rubble. Mkoll indicated a pair of worker hab blocks ahead of them that promised to intersect the Spike’s
course. Gaunt detailed his troopers into two units and sent one ahead under Gilbear, leading the other himself.
Gaunt’s troop was climbing up the stairwell of the nearer hab, five hundred paces ahead of the crawling target,
when the Spike fired again. Its awesome spinal weapon, the cutting beams, howled vast energies above and past
them at some target in the main hive. The sound was louder than their ears could manage. The hab shuddered
thoroughly, and a harsh light-flash penetrated every crevice and opening in the stairwell for a moment. A second later
there was a pop of pressure, a wall of dissipating heat and the stink of plasma.
Gaunt and his troop exchanged glances. It had been like standing too near a star for a millisecond. Their eyes
ached and the energised stench burned their sinuses. Gaunt wiped a thread of blood from his lip.
There was no time to waste, however. Gaunt and Mkoll led the party up to the fifth floor, to the flats at the far end.
The Spike was almost on them. Half a dozen ragged habbers fled past them, running like beaten dogs from their
hideaways.
Gaunt got a signal from Gilbear in the other block. The second unit was in position. He looked out of the end
window, glassless and burned, and saw how close the massive machine now was.
Its lower slopes swiped the edge of the hab block and tore it away, rubble cascading down under the tracks. Gaunt
moved his soldiers back as the passing armour wall tore the end off the room they waited in. Then they moved.
In pairs and trios they leapt clear of the ripped-open building and dropped seven metres onto the sloping sides of
the Spike. Most slid down the ochre-painted hull before managing to cling fast to moulding projections, rivets or
weld-seams. Gaunt landed hard, slid for a moment, then braced against a row of cold-punched bolt-heads. He heard
a cry from above and looked up to see Larkin slithering down the armoured slope, his hands clawing uselessly at the
tarnished metal. Gaunt snagged the sniper by his stealth cape and arrested his slide, nearly throttling him with the taut
fabric. Larkin found purchase and crawled up beside Gaunt.
“Saving my arse again, Ibram?” Larkin stammered in relief.
Gaunt grinned. At a time like this, he hardly minded Mad Larkin’s informality.
“You’re welcome. It’s my job.”
Ten metres down the Spike’s side, Haller also lost his grip. He slid, barking out a helpless curse and slammed into
Dremmond, who was barely holding on himself. The two of them tore away and started to slide much more swiftly
down the flank, thrashing for handholds.
Bragg drew his Tanith blade, punched it into the Spike’s plating to provide a firm anchor point, and caught them as
they tumbled past. He captured Dremmond by the harness of his flamer, and Dremmond held tight to Haller. By then,
they had barrelled into Muril — one of the scratch company loom girls — too, and Haller held on to her. Secured by
one meaty fist around the hilt of his knife, Bragg supported three dangling humans.
“Feth!” he grunted, his arm shaking under the weight. “Get a grip! Get a grip! I can’t hold on much longer!”
Muril swung around and grabbed the edge of an armour plate, digging her fingertips into the seam. As soon as she
was secure, Haller let go and slid down beside her. Bragg heaved the kicking Dremmond up next to him by the man’s
flamer’s straps.
“Good fething catch,” Dremmond gasped, gripping tightly, trying to slow his anxious breathing.
“I don’t always miss,” replied Bragg. He didn’t dare voice his relief. For a moment, he had been close to
dropping them — or being pulled away with them.
Gaunt’s unit, forty bodies, clung to the sloping side of the gigantic Zoican war machine and slowly began to climb
up it. The Spike’s pyramid form was punctuated by shelflike terraces, like some step-temples of antiquity Gaunt had
once seen on Fychis Dolorous. The soldiers crawled up over the lip and made themselves fast on the nearest
horizontal shelf.
The progressing Spike, oblivious to the human lice now adhering to its hide, moved on and slammed over and
through the hab block where Gilbear’s team was waiting. Gaunt watched in horror as the metal slopes demolished a
large chunk of the hab’s lower storeys.
Then he saw Gilbear and his team leaping down from a far higher level. They’d clearly moved up a floor or two
when the impact of the Spike’s course had become evident.
The troopers, led by Gilbear, dropped far further than Gaunt’s unit had done. They impacted on the hull above the
shelf Gaunt and the others occupied, and most slid down onto that safe landing. Some clung on where they found
purchase on the slopes above. Two — a Volpone and the Tanith scout Bonin — bounced away like rocks down a
mountainside and dropped past Gaunt, disappearing a hundred metres below under the lip of the hull. Gaunt looked
away. If the sheer fall hadn’t killed them outright, they were dead under the massive caterpillar carriage.
Gaunt signalled around and made contact with the remaining troopers. They were all rendezvousing on the shelflip.
The Curtain Wall of Vervunhive was now only minutes away and their time was disappearing fast. Weapons
ready, reaching out hands to steady themselves against the motion of the Spike, the strike team followed Gaunt down
the shelf.
The difficult part remained: how to find a way inside this armoured monster.
The hull was solid. Domor pulled out the head of his sweeper kit and pressed it against the throbbing metal.
“Dense — no cavities,” he growled disappointedly.
Gaunt sighed. They could blast or cut the hull open if there was a chance of accessing a hollow space within, but
Domor was positive. It stood to reason a machine like this would be thick-skinned.
Two of Gilbear’s Volpone returned along the shelf from scouting the far end. Gilbear heard their reports and edged
along to Gaunt.
“The main weapon ports along the forward face. They’re open, ready for firing. It’s that or nothing.”
“And if they fire while we’re entering?”
“Then we’re dead. You want to stay out here for the rest of the war?”
Gaunt barked out a laugh at Gilbear’s attitude.
“No. I guess we won’t know anything about it if they fire.”
“It’ll be quick, certainly,” Gilbear agreed.
Gaunt notified the squad leaders and led the single-file team along the shelf.
They were about to make the turn onto the forward face when the beam weapons fired again. The light flash was
even more brutal out in the open and the sucking roar monstrous. The whole Spike shook.
“How long since the last salvo?” Gaunt asked Larkin as soon as his ears stopped ringing.
“Eight minutes, just about, boss.”
“I’m working with the idea it takes a while for the batteries to recharge. We’ve got eight minutes to get inside.”
“It sounds so easy when you put it like that,” snarled Rawne.
“Shouldn’t we be moving rather than debating?” Kolea asked, shaming them all.
Gaunt nodded. “Yes. Now. Go!”
Always, always lead from the front. Never expect a man under your command to undertake an action you’re not
prepared to make yourself. It was one of Delane Oktar’s primary rules, drummed into Gaunt during his years with
the Hyrkans. He was not about to forget his mentor’s advice now.
Gaunt led the way around the corner of the hull and hurried towards the huge, main-weapon recesses below him.
Visor hatches the size of the Sondar Gates were pulled up from the ports like eyelids. The air was sweet and tangy
with burnt plasma and fluorocarbons.
Gaunt reached the edge of the emplacement recess and grabbed hold of one of the shutter stanchions, a
heavyweight hydraulic limb at full extension. His leather glove slid off the oiled, shining metal. He pulled the glove
off and took hold with his bare hand, arming his bolt gun in the other.
Gaunt leapt and let himself fall, swinging down and around like an ape by one hand. Using his body weight’s
pendulum momentum, he threw himself in through the weapon hatch, letting go of the hydraulic limb at the same
moment.
He fell, rather than jumped, inside the hull, landing and stumbling on a grilled cageway that ran alongside the
massive snouts of the beam cannons. Rolling, he saw two black-clad Zoican gunners leap up from their firing
consoles, and he shot them down.
Three Zoican soldiers in full battledress charged up onto the cageway, blasting at him. Gaunt lost his footing and
fell, the las-shots screaming over his head. The shots blew apart the torso of the Volpone leaping in behind him and
threw his corpse back and outwards so it fell away down the slope of the hull. Recovering, Gaunt resumed firing,
aiming precise head-shots at the Zoicans, exploding their full-face helmets with high-explosive rounds.
Then Gilbear, Mkoll and three other Tanith had made it inside behind him. Mkoll opened up with his lasrifle,
supporting Gaunt’s fire-pattern, and Gilbear turned back to pull others of the strike force in through the huge awning.
Gaunt and Mkoll advanced with Crothe and Rilke, partly to secure the weapon deck and partly to make room. The
commissar and his three Tanith troopers scoured the gun-control position, blasting dozens of Zoican personnel.
Within moments, the Zoican troopers set up a flaying return of fire. Crothe was blasted off his feet and Mkoll took
a hit in his hip. He slammed back into the wall and fell, but somehow maintained his fire rate.
Now Gilbear and three of his elite Blueblood were coming in behind, laying down a field of fire with their
hellguns. Behind them on the cageway, Haller and Kolea were dragging the other squad members in through the
hatch.
Gilbear’s fire team advanced and secured the gunnery deck behind the colossal beam emitters, slaying everything
that moved. The air in the chamber was dense and rich with gunsmoke. The grilled deck was strewn with Zoican
dead.
Somewhere an alarm began to wail.
Inside four minutes, Gaunt’s strike team had entered the Spike via the gun-ports, all seventy-eight of them. Three
had died in the initial engagement. Gaunt checked on Mkoll. His wound was superficial and he was already back on
his feet.
The strike force spread out to cover all the exitways on the gloomy gundeck.
He led the way to a main blast door that gave access to the Spike’s inner cavities. It was locked fast.
“I can blow it,” said Kolea at his side.
Gaunt drew the powersword of Heironymo Sondar, activated it, and sliced the incandescent blade through the
hatch. A further three sweeps and a kick left the hatchway open, the cut section of metal clanging as it fell on the deck
outside.
“Move!” cried Gaunt. “Move!”
The Spike’s main weapon deck was linked to the primary command sections by a long, sloping accessway wide
enough for a Leman Russ to drive along it. It was painted matt red, the colour of meat, and thick bulkhead frames
stood at every twenty metres. The floor was a metal grille and in the underfloor cavity, pipes, tubing and feeder
cables could be seen. Off to either side, just on the other side of the blast door, stood service elevators with metal
cage frames, set in circular loading docks. The elevators were heavy-duty freight lifts designed to haul shells from
the munition stockpiles deep in the belly of the Spike up to the artillery blisters on the upper slopes. The metal walls
of the accessway were covered with intricate emblems, the curious, nauseating runes of Chaos. Gaunt realised they
had been fashioned from bone that had been inlaid into the metal and then polished flat with the wall so they glowed
and shone like pearl.
Human bone, he guessed. The Heritor would demand such details.
A team of Zoican heavy troopers in segmented ochre body armour greeted them in the accessway as they entered,
firing up the sloping tunnel from cover at the far end. One of the scratches, a man whose name Gaunt would never
know, was sliced apart by the initial shots. His blood sprayed the bone icons on the wall, and the symbols began to
squirm and shift.
Larkin saw this and fell back in horror, his guts churning. The eldritch symbols were alive, excited by blood. He
knew he was about to vomit with fear.
“Taking a breather?” Banda asked sourly as she pushed past him, firing down at the enemy position. The Imperials
were hugging the walls and using the bulkheads for cover, edging down the accessway as far as the enemy fire would
allow.
“A breather?” Larkin gulped. He was incredulous. No smirking girl from the hab looms would show him up.
Forgetting his fear, he knelt in cover, shook out his neck, raised his sniper-variant lasrifle and put a hot-shot
between the eyes of a Zoican heavy twenty paces away.
“Nice work,” Banda growled from her position and blew Larkin a cocky kiss.
Larkin grinned and made another kill-shot. Either he was beginning to like this woman, or he’d kill her himself.
Another of the scratches fell, ripped open by the mauling heavy weapons the enemy had trained on them. They
were caught too tightly between the hall and the entry point Gaunt had cut open. His men fanned round into the side
loading docks, but they were packed in.
Rawne hurled a tube charge down the tunnel, but the Zoicans had enough cover to shelter from it.
“Dremmond!” Gaunt yelled.
The flamer-trooper was still trying to pull his bulky tanks through the narrow opening Gaunt’s powersword had
sliced. Las-rounds peppered the metal around him. A Ghost nearby, Lonner, collapsed with the back of his neck
blown out.
Dremmond was clear. Gaunt and Kolea physically dragged the big Ghost to the front of the line and Dremmond
braced his scorched flame-gun, ensuring the feed-pipe wasn’t twisted and the igniter was sparking.
He squeezed the trigger grip and billows of white-hot flame sheeted down the tunnel, incinerating the Zoican
heavies. The scourging flame bubbled the paint off the walls and the twitching bone-runes began to shriek.
He washed the hall with another gout to be sure, and then Rawne, Haller and Bragg led off to secure the hall.
Bragg reached the position the enemy had been holding and he stepped over the black, fused corpses. There was
another accessway to his left and he sprayed bursts of autogun fire through the door mouth.
Haller moved to the right and went over hard as a half-burned Zoican soldier threw himself at the scratch officer.
The blackened thing, its ceramite armour part-melted into its flesh by Dremmond’s flames, tore at him in a frenzy.
Haller screamed out, frantic. Rawne grabbed the Zoican and threw it off Haller. It bounced off a wall and, before it
could rise, Rawne had shot it four times with his lasgun.
“I owe you, Ghost,” said Haller, getting up.
“No, you don’t, habber. I don’t like it when any one owes me anything. Forget it.”
Haller paused, as if slapped in the face. He hadn’t much liked the look of the Tanith major when they had all first
assembled. Banda had whispered Rawne had “toxic eyes.” It seemed true. Even the haughty Volpone seemed to be
making more of an effort to be comradely than this Tanith bastard.
“Suit yourself,” Haller said.
“He always does,” mocked Bragg. The big Ghost knew it was neither the time nor the place to bring Haller up to
speed on Rawne’s history, the fact that Rawne hated Gaunt with an inhuman passion precisely because “he owed
him.”
“Shut it and get soldiering!” Rawne snorted to Bragg. Already there were noises from the side tunnels and fresh
Zoican forces were firing on them.
The main strike force had moved up by then. Gilbear swung a party of Blue-bloods to the right and cremated a
side-tunnel with grenades from their under-barrel launchers. MkVenner hurried right with four Tanith and a number
of scratches, moving to secure their advance from enemy prosecution. A las-round hit him in the arm and spun him to
the deck. Domor, right behind him, knelt over the injured scout and sprayed las-fire down at the hidden shooter,
calling for a medic. Beside him, Vinya, one of the loom-girls, rebounded off the wall as a brace of las-shots caught
her in the belly. Several troopers pushed past Domor to hold the side-tunnel, flaying las-fire down into the dark.
Gherran joined Domor, running low, holding a las pistol in one hand, the other hand curled around the narthecium
kit to stop it jolting.
“It’s MkVenner—” Domor began. The medic dropped to his knees beside the scout. The las-shot had exploded
MkVenner’s left elbow and disintegrated his biceps. He was curled up, crying with pain, but he forced his voice to
work.
“Her first — her!” he said, nodding over at Vinya.
“Let me look at it, MkVenner,” Gherran said.
“No! You know fething triage: serious cases first! She’s gut-shot! See to her!”
“Give him this,” Gherran told Domor, handing him a gauze-packed inoculator full of high-dose painkillers. He
scrambled over to the sprawled scratch soldier. She was twisted like a broken puppet, her chin forced into her chest
where she lay with the back of her head against the wall. Blood oozed out of her in a wide pool. The wound itself
had self-cauterised in charred, knotty lumps, but the damage had shredded her insides, and she was bleeding out
rapidly.
“Oh, feth!” Gherran spat. “Someone give me a hand here!”
Kolea was beside him. “Tell me how.”
“Pressure: here and here. Hold it tight. No, tight like you mean it!”
They were both sodden with her blood. She stirred, moaning.
“Vinya… s’okay… Stay awake…” Kolea murmured to her, his hands damping hard on her ruined organs.
He looked around at Gherran as he worked frantically.
“She’s not going to make it, is she?”
“Major trauma,” Gherran explained as he worked. “I can stabilise her, but no, it’s just a matter of time.”
Kolea nodded. He let go and leaned down to whisper in her ear, “You fought well, Vinya Terrigo of Hab 45/jad.
Vervunhive will never forget your courage. The hive loves you for your devotion.”
Then he reached down with huge, gentle hands and snapped her neck.
“Oh, God-Emperor!” Gherran cried, recoiling in horror.
“There’s a man you can save,” Kolea said, pointing at MkVenner with a bloody hand. “I love my people, and I
will fight for them with every last measure of my strength, but this would have uselessly wasted the time of a good
medic when there are better causes. Her pain is over. She has found peace.”
Gherran wiped his mouth.
“I—” he began.
“If you were going to tell me you couldn’t begin to understand what we habbers have gone through to get here,
save it. I don’t want your pity.”
“Actually, friend, I was going to tell you I do understand. And admire your courage, to boot. Our lives are all on
the line fighting for your home. Me, I don’t have a home anymore. So, feth you and that oh-so-noble crap.” Gherran
gathered his kit-pack and moved over to MkVenner.
Kolea picked up his lasgun and strode past, rejoining the fight.
Cocoer, Neskon and Flinn had made it to the corner of the right hand side access, and they drove the gathering
Zoicans backwards. Gaunt, with Genx and Maroy, crawled up behind them.
“Access?” asked Gaunt.
“Not a fething hope, sir!” sang out Cocoer. The air was flickering with las crossfire.
“Bloody bastard hell!” Neskon cried as his gun jammed. He shook it. Gaunt grabbed him and yanked him down
into cover just as laser blasts pummelled the wall above his head.
“Never forget the drill, Neskon. Gun jams: duck and cover. Don’t stand there playing with it.”
“No, colonel-commissar.”
“I like you better alive.”
“Me… me too, sir.”
Rilke, reckoned to be the best sniper in the Ghosts after Larkin, and the scratch woman Nessa moved up to flank
them. Rilke wasted two shots trying to hit a Zoican in cover down the tunnel. Nessa, with her standard-issue lasgun,
picked him off and the Zoican behind him.
“Where’d you learn to shoot like that?” Rilke protested, but she didn’t hear him. She couldn’t hear him.
Gaunt looked across at her, waiting until she saw his face. “Good,” he said.
She grinned.
A ceiling panel ten metres back slammed open and Zoican stormtroops began to drop down out of it like grains of
sand through the neck of an hourglass. They sprayed shots in both directions. Four Ghosts, two scratches and a
Blueblood went down. Bragg wheeled and decimated the spilling Zoicans, his withering autocannon supported by
Haller, Rawne, Genx and a dozen others.
The Zoican dead lay in a heap under the ceiling drop. Bragg raised his muzzle and began to fire up into the roof,
his heavy rounds punching smooth-edged holes through the sheet metal. Blood began to drip down through some of
them.
“We’re bottled in!” Mkoll yelled at Gaunt.
Gaunt knew as much. Gilbear had blocked the left-hand access, but the right was still thick with Zoicans. And now
they were coming down through the ceiling, for feth’s sake! At this rate, his strike cadre would exhaust themselves
simply maintaining a perimeter. If they were going to do anything of note, they had to focus.
“Mkoll?” Gaunt called.
Mkoll knew what was being asked of him. Gaunt had always valued the chief scout’s unnerving ability to find the
right way. It wasn’t a gift, really. Somehow, sometime back in the shifting, drifting forest ways of Tanith, he had
come to understand the logic of structure, the underlying sense of any environment.
Mkoll’s gut said straight ahead and down.
“Through the blast shields, sir,” Mkoll announced.
That was good enough for Gaunt. He crawled back, under heavy fire, to the shields. “Rawne! Tube charges here!”
“What are you doing?” bellowed Gilbear, moving up. “That way will lead us off into the right hand side of the
structure!”
Gaunt looked at Gilbear, las-shots whizzing around them. “After all we’ve seen, Gilbear, do you trust me?”
“Very probably, but—”
“If you were constructing this Spike, would you put the main command deck in the dead centre where anyone
would expect it to be?”
Gilbear thought for a moment and shook his head.
“Then humour me. I’ve learned to go with Mkoll’s instincts. If I’m wrong, I’ll stand you a case of wine. You can
choose the vintage.”
“If you’re wrong, we’ll be dead!”
“Why do you think I made the bet?”
Gilbear laughed out loud.
“Cover and clear!” yelled Rawne, hastening from the bundle of tube charges he had glued to the shield hatch.
The channelled blast tore the doors inwards like paper. Whatever else you could say about him, Rawne knew
explosives. There was barely a Shockwave on the Imperial side of the hatch.
“For Tanith!” yelled Gaunt, hurling himself through the opening.
“For Volpone!” bawled Gilbear, right beside him.
“For Vervunhive!” mouthed Nessa to herself, close on their heels.
Guild Githran Agricultural had fallen. Corbec drove his Tanith back towards the base of the Main Spine with all hell
following. Milo and Baffels guided their survivor company out of the ruins, chased by Zoican tank groups. Bray’s
mixed units wilted in retreat as divisions of Zoican stormtroopers drove up into the inner habs.
The Shield Pylon shuddered as it took shell after shell.
At Croe Gate, Grizmund’s valiant counteraction finally reached a stop. Flat crabs and spider death machines
lumbered in at them, in strengths even the crusade’s finest tank regiment could not withstand.
On the dock causeway, Varl and Rodyin began to pull their infantry back, facing an ochre host ten thousand strong.
Along the edge of the Commercia, where one of the war’s bloodiest battles had been waged, Bulwar ordered his
NorthCol and scratch companies to retreat. Overhead, the Shield flickered and waned. It would not last much longer.
In the middle of a horrendous brawl in a side trench, Soric hammered his axe-rake into the foe. He was one of the
last to heed Bulwar’s retreat order.
Corday’s Volpone unit was pincered by Zoican detachments. The Blue-bloods were slaughtered by crossfire in the
rubble wastes that had once been the inner-sector habs. Corday died with his men.
In a lost pocket in the wastelands, Caffran held Tona Criid tight, Yoncy and Dalin curled between them. The sky
was on fire and shells fell all around. It was just a matter of time, Caffran knew. But until then, he would hold her
and the children as tight as he could.
In the baptistry, Ban Daur set aside his headset and sat back in his seat. The workers and staff servitors were still
milling around, trying to maintain some semblance of control.
It was over. Daur got up and crossed to Otte at the Font. Windows blew in down the hall and the Main Spine
shuddered as shells struck it.
“We gave it our best,” Daur said.
“For Vervunhive,” Otte agreed, weeping quietly with fatigue.
Intendant Banefail joined them. “High Legislator Anophy has just been carried out. A heart attack.”
“Then he’s been spared,” Daur said callously.
Otte looked at him reprovingly, but Banefail seemed to agree. “This is the end, my brave friends. The Emperor
love you for your efforts, but this is the end of all things. Vervunhive is lost. Make your peace.”
Daur looked round at Immaculus. The minister stood nearby with his robed clergy.
“Begin the mass, sir,” Daur told him. “The requiem. I want the last sound I hear to be a psalm of loss voiced by
the Emperor’s own.”
Immaculus nodded. He led his brethren into the celebratory and the soft dirge, a haunting melody, began to lift
above the baptistry and the high stations of Vervunhive.
In the abandoned hall of her house, high in the Spine, Merity Chass heard the low plainsong welling through the
walls. She had put on a long, formal gown and her father’s ducal chain and signet ring, which Daur had brought to
her. She had spent an hour putting the House Chass ledgers in order and encrypting all the family documents onto
storage crystals. At the sound of the mass, she frowned.
“Not yet… not yet…” she murmured. “He won’t fail us…”
EIGHTEEN
THE LAIR OF ASPHODEL
“A friend of death, a brother of luck and a son of a bitch.”
—Major Rawne, of his commander
Its sounds amplified by the thick, metal walls around, carnage exploded into the Spike’s command level. Savage
fighting boiled through the dark, mesh-floored chambers. The strikeforce were engaging crew now as well as troops.
The crew members wore loose flak-tunics and work-fatigues, and their heads were generally exposed. Gaunt’s
troopers could see for themselves the horror that had disturbed Larkin so at Veyveyr Gate. It wasn’t the implants
fused and sutured into their eyes, ears and scalps, linking their senses and brain patterns to the insidious chatter. It
was the fact that they were men and women of all ages: hab workers, parents, guilders, older children, the elderly.
The entirety of Zoica’s population had mobilised for war, just as Gaunt had assessed. The bald proof was
overwhelmingly tragic. With blank expressions, somehow even more lifeless than Sondar’s servitor puppets, the
people of Ferrozoica threw themselves at the attackers.
Gaunt hacked through a pair of Zoican troopers with his powersword, fighting to cut a route down onto the main
bridge area. Through the seething press, the smoke and the flashes of las-fire, he could make out a wide, open
platform of polished chrome, surrounded by black towers of control instrumentation. In the centre of the platform, the
glowing, pinkish ball of a coherent light field, ten metres in diameter, coalesced up from an emitter ring in the floor.
He fought his way to it, channelling his deepest reserves of aggression and determination.
Suddenly, he was on the platform itself, virtually alone, lit by the pink radiance. His last frenzied efforts to break
through had been almost too successful. He’d effectively separated himself from the rest of his party, still locked into
the mayhem in the adjacent bridge areas.
Gaunt was breathing hard and shaking. He’d lost his cap somewhere, his jacket was torn and he was splattered
with blood. An almost painful adrenaline high fizzled through him like electricity glowing through fuse-wire. He had
never been pushed to such an extremity of raw fury before in his life. His mind was locked out in a paroxysm of
battle-rage. Everything had become distant and incomprehensible. For a moment, he couldn’t remember what he was
supposed to be doing.
Something flickered behind him and he wheeled, his blade flashing as it made contact. A tall, black figure lurched
backwards. It was thin but powerful and much taller than him, dressed in form-fitting, glossy-black armour and a
hooded cape of chainmail. The visage under the hood-lip was feral and non-human, like the snarling skull of a great
wolf-hound with the skin scraped off. It clutched a sabre-bladed powersword in its metal-gloved hands.
Gaunt had seen its like before, on Balhaut. He’d glimpsed its kind distantly on the fields of war, during the final
stage of the battle, and then seen several corpses closer to after the victory. It was one of the Dark-watch, the elite
retinue of Chaos champions who had been gifted to the warlord, Asphodel, as his personal bodyguard. The thing
flickered again, employing its monstrous, innate control of the warp to shift its location around him. Gaunt yelled and
blocked the incoming blade of the repositioned horror. The cold blue energies of Heironymo’s powersword clashed
against the sparking, blood-red fires of the Darkwatcher’s weapon.
It flicker-shifted again, just a few paces to the left, and sliced its sword around at him. Gaunt evaded, stumbling in
his haste, rolling and then springing up in time to block the downward swing of the Chaos-tainted blade.
But this was not the same weapon. This was longer, straighter, incandescent with smoking green fire. A second
Darkwatcher, shifting in to assist the first.
Without looking, Gaunt threw himself sideways, knowing the original fury was now behind him. Red energy sliced
a gouge in the gleaming chrome deck.
He backed as they came at him together, both flickering in and out of reality. One was suddenly to his left, but
Gaunt threw all his force behind a blocking strike that bounced the blade away. The other sliced in at him and caught
Gaunt’s right shoulder.
There was no pain. A cold, nauseating numbness ached into his wounded limb.
Gaunt hurled himself forward in a tuck roll, avoiding two more slashes. He knew he had never been this
outmatched before, not even face to face with howling World Eater Chaos Marines in the underworld of Fortis
Binary or surrounded by the Iron Men in the crypts of Menazoid Epsilon. He should be dead already.
But something kept him alive. Partly his elevated battle-edge, partly his determination, but also, he was sure,
Heironymo’s sword. It seemed to smell the shifting creatures and forewarn him — by a tingle — of their impossible
movements.
Their shifting was localised, as if they were moving in and out of corporeal reality. Every time they became solid
to strike, the sword twitched in his grip, moving him to block.
He ducked a scything arc of green energy and stabbed upwards, shearing one Darkwatcher’s head off in a flurry of
blue sparks. Lambent, frosty smoke jetted out of its tall form as it collapsed in upon itself, flickering and fading. A
inhuman scream rang around the bridge.
The other lunged at him, flickering into being right in his face, and though the powersword pulled at him, he
wasn’t quick enough to avoid the deep gouge the red blade sliced in his left thigh.
Gaunt fell.
A spray of autocannon split the air above him. Bragg had made it to the edge of the platform and was blasting at
the Darkwatcher on full auto. The thing shuddered under the impacts, flickering in and out of real-space, its chain
cloak whipping as it turned to face the new attack. Kolea and Mkoll were there too, heaving up onto the edge of the
chrome level, opening fire at the beast. A second later, Neskon, Haller, Flinn, Banda and a Volpone called Tonsk had
also reached the edge of the platform. Sustained fire from all of them drove the raging Chaos-thing backwards — and
targeted the other two that had manifested in the last few moments. Bragg’s unrelenting fire-cone gradually
disintegrated the red-bladed Darkwatcher, which advanced on him, despite the colossal wash of bullets, before
finally exploding a few flicker-steps from him.
One of the others, wielding a pike-axe which smoked with orange lightning, chopped Tonsk in two and severed
Neskon’s left leg at the knee with one stroke. Haller snatched up the Blueblood’s fallen hellgun, pumped the underbarrel
launcher and blew the thing’s head off with a rocket-grenade.
The others, supported by more of the strike force just making it to the platform, caught the remaining Darkwatcher
in a crossfire. The thing shrieked and flickered, twisting in the las-hail.
Behind them, the remaining elements of Gaunt’s brigade fought a desperate rearguard at the Zoicans pouring into
the command area from all around.
Gaunt clawed at one of the instrumentation towers at the edge of the platform and pulled himself to his feet.
Hololithic screens projecting from the domed roof above showed fuzzy, amber-tinted views of the onslaught outside.
The Spike, with its supporting armoured legions, had exploded in through the Curtain Wall just east of Sondar Gate,
and the war machine’s vast batteries, presumably recrewed after Gaunt’s entry assault, targeted and demolished the
Shield Pylon in a blaze of fire.
Sections of the huge structure crashed down across the Commercia, like a titanic tree being felled, wreathed in
great washes of flame instead of foliage. Rather than being deactivated as before, the Shield collapsed, its massive
energies unsecured and arcing out. The energy flare, designed to protect the city of Vervunhive, ripped the top ten
levels off the Main Spine, and all the anchor stations around the city perimeter exploded.
The powersword loose in his hand, Gaunt searched the instrumentation around him for some system he could
recognise. It had been built by the tech-wrights of Ferrozoica, so its essential patterns were Imperial, but the
markings and format were wretched and alien.
Gaunt staggered across to the next tower and resumed his search. He found what appeared to be a vox-terminal
and a pict-link displayer. But nothing else he could understand.
Behind him, the last Darkwatcher exploded, taking Trooper Flinn with it.
The third tower. Halfway down, what could only be a data-slate reader with a universal hub: standard Imperial
fitting.
Gaunt felt himself sag, his leg wound pulling at him. Blood from his shoulder wound soaked his sleeve and
dripped off his hand.
“Gaunt!” yelled Kolea, at his side, supporting him. Mkoll was there too, and Genx, Gherran and Domor.
“Let me see to your wounds!” Gherran was yelling.
“No t-time!”
“Let him help you, Gaunt!” Kolea growled, trying to keep the struggling commissar upright. “Let me—”
“No!” Gaunt shook the big miner off. If this was the final act, it would be his.
He pulled the ticking, chuckling amulet from his pocket and fitted its link ports to the reader’s hub.
It engaged, purred and turned twice like a kodoc beetle burying its abdomen in the sand.
The lighting and instrument power in the command section shorted on and off two, three, four times. A mechanical
wailing of tortured, over-raced turbines welled up from the vast machine pits below them. The chatter cut short.
Then the lights went out altogether.
Sudden, total darkness; sudden quiet. In the stillness, the groans of the dying and wounded; the bright, brief crackle
and fizz of torn cables. A flash of las-fire.
Gaunt’s eyes grew accustomed to the gloom. The heart of the Spike was dead. Smoke wafted, full of the rich,
animal smells of war. Men stirred, blinking.
The force field in the centre of the platform had vanished.
A huge form, dark like a shadow, crouched where the field had been. It rose, unfurled, grew larger. In the halflight,
Gaunt saw the richly embroidered silk of a vast cape spilling away from the figure as it stood. He saw an
immense, metal-gloved hand reach out and beckon to him. He saw the shivering flame-light throw into relief a long,
smooth armour-cowl split by narrow eye-slits. The cowl fanned up and out into massive, hooked steeples of
polished horn.
Heritor Asphodel, Chaos warlord, daemon-thing, fuelled by his dark gods in the Warp, standing fully six metres
tall, lunged at the human worms who strove to defeat him. He made no sound. Darkness, which he seemed to wear
and pull around him like a great cloak, sucked through the air as it moved with him.
Kolea buried his axe-rake in the Heritor’s flank. A second later, he was flying sideways across the platform, most
of his ribs shattered.
Firing and making two hits, Mkoll was knocked sideways, his shoulder broken.
Domor’s lasgun exploded in his hands, blowing him up, back and off the platform.
Gherran was lacerated by an ebbing fold of darkness, sharp as a billion blades. His blood made a mist that
drenched Gaunt.
Genx was pulverised by the concussive force of the daemon’s fist as he tried to reload his weapon and fire.
Gaunt met Asphodel head on. He slammed the blazing blue spike of the powersword into and through the
monstrosity’s chest.
At the same moment, the massive bolt pistol clenched in the Heritor’s left hand shot Gaunt through the heart.
NINETEEN
MOURNING GLORY
“With this act we have richly denied the Darkness and made trophies of its creatures. A dark lord is dead. So, this
holy crusade, blessed by the Emperor, is advanced with glory.”
—Warmaster Macaroth, at Verghast
They came like ghosts at dusk. Phantom forms, impossibly large, underlit by the dying sun as they settled down
through the smoke-filthy upper atmosphere of Verghast. Warships, bulk troop transports, the might of the Sabbat
Worlds Crusade, the pride of the Segmentum Pacificus Navy.
It was the fiftieth day. Learning via the Astropathicus that Vervunhive faced not an inconsequential rival hive but a
hunted Chaos commander, Macaroth had made best speed for Verghast, arriving after twenty-seven days of urgent
transit through the warp.
The hazy sky was full of metal and looked like it should fall. The awesome power of the Imperium was there for
every Verghastite to see: ten thousand ships, some the size of cities, some bloated like ornate oceanic turtles, some
slender and serrated like airborne cathedrals.
Macaroth unleashed his might on the planet below: six million Guardsmen, half a million tanks, squads drawn
from three chapters of the Adeptus Astartes, two Titan Legions. Troop dropships, bulk machine-lifters and shuttles
dropped in a swarm on the Hass valley. For a while, the sky did fall.
Mass destruction followed, lasting for five days, thought it was brutally one-sided. Heironymo’s amulet had done
its work and cut the insidious chatter for all time. By the time the warmaster’s immense forces arrived, the Zoicans
were already in total rout. Aimless and lost, they broke off the final assault. Many committed suicide or wandered
blindly into the defenders’ fields of fire to be massacred. Millions of others woke as if from a dream and stumbled,
without purpose or motive, back into the grasslands.
Under Grizmund’s command, the battered Imperial forces that had held Vervunhive for over a month reformed to
drive the pitiful, bewildered invaders out. Narmenian and NorthCol tank brigades chased down and annihilated
Zoican motorised units threading back across the grasslands towards their own hive. Guard infantry, co-ordinated by
Colonel Corbec, Colonel Bulwar and Major Otte, utilising every troop-carrying machine they could raise, hunted out
and slaughtered the fleeing troop elements in vast numbers. There was no question of mercy. Ferrozoica’s taint had to
be expunged.
By the time Macaroth’s armada made orbit, the Zoicans had been driven back six hundred kilometres into the
plains, leaving vehicles and equipment scattered and abandoned in their wake.
In the crippled hive itself, scratch companies slowly weeded out the last, feral pockets of Zoican resistance.
The warmaster followed up with unstinting vigour. He politely but determinedly requested the assistance of the
Iron Snakes Space Marines to overtake and neutralise the fleeing enemy. His armoured brigades poured down the
main highways and decimated everything that lived. Skeletal Titans, shrieking like wraiths, stalked the grassland
horizons, incinerating the retreating foe.
On the fifty-fourth day, crusade warships torched Ferrozoica Hive from low orbit. The blinding flame-flare filled
the southern horizon.
But by then, the fight was out of the Zoicans and had been since the thirty-seventh day. Without the hypnotic chatter
to unify their cause and drive them on, they had crumbled. Imperial Fist Space Marines ceremonially destroyed the
Spike and incinerated the Heritor’s corpse.
The final battle was one of humanitarian support. Intendant Banefail, along with the hive elders and noble houses,
laboured to accommodate the millions of wounded and homeless. By day sixty, the true scale of the human cost was
undeniable. Vervunhive was a necropolis: a city of the dead. Meeting with the surviving nobility, Macaroth signed
the Dissolution Warrant that formally acknowledged Vervunhive’s extinction. The hive was dead. All population
elements were to be absorbed by the Northern Collectives or shipped to Ghasthive and the Isthmus Steeples. Two
new hives were to be founded, one ruled by a clique of noble houses under House Anko, the other a collective
governed by Houses Chass and Rodyin. Names would come later. It would be generations until these municipal
structures would begin to establish themselves, and it would be decades before the bulk of the dispossessed
population could be given new, permanent homes.
Lord Anko, siting his new hive’s foundations higher up the Hass waters from dead Vervunhive, planned to exploit
the prometheum reserves once controlled by Vannick. Lady Chass, the first woman to govern a collective on
Vervunhive, set her foundation in the grasslands far to the south and turned to mining and servitor engineering. Their
future rivalry and confrontation would be long and complex, but is not pertinent to this history.
At the time, an air of disillusion fell hard on the survivors of Vervunhive. Many felt they had given everything in
defence of the city only to see the city abandoned anyway. When this mood was made known to the war-master, he
spoke publicly about his decision and made law an Act of Consolation.
The warmaster’s staff faced a thousand duties as they tidied up the mess of the Vervunhive War. One of those was the
prosecution of all those who had acted in a manner disloyal to the Emperor during that period of great hardship.
The reports of the Tanith Sergeant Varl, as logged by his commander, Gaunt, were sorted and processed by the
Administratum during the latter stages of the purge. On day fifty-nine, prosecuting war-crime charges, Vervun
Primary troops stormed the halls of Guild Worlin. Amchanduste Worlin was not to be found.
“They say he wants to see you,” Corbec said, leaning back against the sill of a vast stained-glass window in Medical
Hall 67/mv.
“He can wait.”
“I’m sure he can,” Corbec grinned. “He’s only a warmaster.”
“Feth. They’re really abandoning the hive — after everything we did?”
“I think maybe because of everything we did. There’s not much left standing.”
Ibram Gaunt heaved himself upright on his cot. The pain of his shoulder and thigh wounds had long since faded,
but the burning ache in his chest still plagued him. He coughed blood, for the third time since Corbec had arrived.
“You should probably lie still, sir,” Corbec ventured.
“Probably,” returned Gaunt. It was the sixty-second day. He had been unconscious for most of the previous month
and had undergone repeated surgery to repair the wound Heritor Asphodel had dealt him. Gaunt still didn’t know —
and never would — if it had been dumb luck or fate that had saved him. The Heritor’s bolt had hit him directly on the
steel rose Lord Chass had made him wear. Though the collapsing petals had been driven into his chest, it was certain
he would not have survived otherwise.
“You heard about the Act of Consolation?”
“I heard. What of it?”
“Well, sir, you wouldn’t believe the number of new Ghosts we’ve recruited.”
Under the terms of the Act of Consolation, any disillusioned Vervunhiver anxious to leave Verghast to find a new life
was offered the possibility of training for a place in the Imperial Guard. Upwards of forty thousand elected to do so.
Some made their choice of unit a condition of their acceptance.
Motor convoys carried them north with the regular army to board bulk carriers that had put in at Kannak Port.
Sergeant Agun Soric oversaw the embarkation of his brave Irregulars. All of them were yet to be issued with their
Tanith fatigues and camo-capes. Soric moved past the ship’s payload doors and greeted Sergeant Kolea, who had
also joined up, along with most of his scratch company. Kolea was walking on crutches, his torso encased in
mediplas bindings.
“We’ll never see it again,” said Soric.
“What?”
“Verghast. Take a last look.”
“Nothing here for me now anyway,” Kolea said. Under his breath, he uttered a last goodbye to his lost wife and
beloved children.
Half a kilometre away, Bragg supervised the loading of other Ghosts. Many, like Domor and Mkoll, were walking
wounded. Along with the soldiers came the inevitable wave of camp followers, lugging their possessions: clerks,
cooks, armourers, mechanics, women.
Bragg caught sight of Caffran leading a girl and two children up the ramp. One was just a babe in arms. He noticed
that the girl, along with her piercings and surly look, wore the temporary badge of a Guard recruit. Another female
trooper. Bad enough Kolea’s fighting women had been given a place. Larkin would have a seizure.
Jumping down from his transit truck, Ban Daur took a last, wistful look at the land around him. He felt like a lost
soul given one last chance to haunt the place that had raised him.
That was appropriate. He wasn’t Captain Ban Daur of Vervun Primary anymore. He was a Ghost.
“I kept these for a long while,” Ana Curth said. She held out the dog tags that had been in the pocket of her apron
since Veyveyr Gate. “I knew there would be no good time for you to see them, but maybe now…”
Dorden took the tags. He read them, sighing.
“Mikal Dorden. Infantryman. Yes, I… they told me…”
“I’m sorry, Dorden. Really I am.”
Dorden looked up from where he sat, his eyes wet with tears. “So am I. You know I was the only Ghost to have a
relative in the Tanith regiment? My son. A fragile, last link to the world we lost. And now… that’s gone too.”
She held him to her as he shuddered and wept.
A door banged open and a guilder peered in at them. He was dressed in rich robes and had a driven intensity
about his face.
“Whatever you’re looking for, it isn’t in here,” Curth told him, holding Dorden tightly.
“Surgeon Curth?”
“Yes? What?”
The guilder entered the swab-room. He smiled. “I was looking for, erm, Surgeon Curth and Medic Dorden.” He
unfolded a scrap of vellum. “I had a request to talk to me… about that terrible incident at the carriage station weeks
ago. God-Emperor, it was awful!”
Curth let go of Dorden and turned round to the guilder.
“I’m Curth,” she said, stepping forward. “Thank you for coming. I need to know: what did you see?”
“I want Dorden here too, before I speak,” Worlin said.
“That’s me,” Dorden said, rising and wiping his eyes.
“Both of you? Dorden and Curth?” Worlin grinned.
“Yes? What did you want to tell us? What did you see?”
Worlin pulled out his needle pistol and grinned. “This.”
Dorden threw himself at Curth as Worlin opened fire. The first shot punched through Dorden’s right hand, the
second through his left thigh. The third hit Curth in the shoulder and threw her across the room.
Worlin advanced on Dorden, aiming the sleekly murderous pistol, eyes burning.
“Let’s keep this between ourselves, doctor,” he hissed.
A bolt round blew Worlin’s head off in matted chunks. Gaunt, gun raised, limped into the swab-room, supported
by the bewildered Corbec.
“I heard shooting,” Gaunt said as he passed out.
TWENTY
NECROPOLIS
“Enough of this. Too many ghosts.”
—Ibram Gaunt, at Verghast
The outboards purred. The Magnificat lurched away from the dock into the middle of the Hass. It left behind a vast
city-hulk still burning and smouldering. Folik steered them out, chasing the last tides of the day.
He left the bridge and dropped down onto the rear skirt of the old ferry, approaching the man in the long coat and
peaked cap who leaned against the rail as if in pain. For a week, Folik had been ferrying Guardsmen to the north
shore, the beginning of their long journey to who knew where next.
This was the very last run.
In the cabin seating, Dorden looked over at Curth, her shoulder bulked up by bandage.
“Are you sure about this, surgeon?”
“Utterly. I’ve given Verghast all I have.”
Dorden nodded.
“So have you, Tolin, and so much more than me. I want to repay the Guard. Don’t tell me you can’t use another
medic.”
“Indeed not, Curth.”
She smiled sadly. “I think, by now, it’s all right for you to call me Ana.”
* * *
“It’s a pleasure to have you aboard, sir,” Folik said to Gaunt. “You being the People’s Hero and all.”
“Are you sure you’re not getting me mixed up with someone else?”
“I don’t think so. You’re Commissar Gaunt, aren’t you?”
Gaunt nodded. He looked back across the Hass at the dead ruins of Vervunhive. They continued to burn in the low,
morning light.
He took the shattered petals of the metal flower Dorden had cut out of his flesh and cast them out across the water.


A WARHAMMER 40,000 NOVEL
Honour Guard
Gaunt’s Ghosts - 04
Dan Abnett
For Colin Fender, honorary guardsman and Marco, patience of a saint.
IT IS THE 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor has sat immobile on the Golden
Throne of Earth. He is the master of mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might of
his inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with power from the Dark Age of Technology. He
is the Carrion Lord of the Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he may never truly
die.
YET EVEN IN his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the
daemon-infested miasma of the warp, the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the
psychic manifestation of the Emperor's will. Vast armies give battle in his name on uncounted worlds. Greatest
amongst his soldiers are the Adeptus Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades in
arms are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the
tech-priests of the Adeptus Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely enough to
hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants - and worse.
TO BE A man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live in the cruellest and most bloody
regime imaginable. These are the tales of those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and understanding, for in the grim dark future
there is only war. There is no peace amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter of
thirsting gods.
The monumental imperial crusade to liberate the Sabbat Worlds cluster from the grip of Chaos had been raging
for over a decade and a half when Warmaster Macaroth began his daring assaults on the strategically vital
Cabal system. This phase of reconquest lasted almost two whole years, and featured a bravura, multi-point
invasion scheme devised by Macaroth himself. Simultaneous Imperial assaults were launched against nineteen
key planets, including three of the notorious fortress-worlds, shaking the dug-in resolve of the numerically
superior but less well-orchestrated enemy.
From his war room logs, we know that Macaroth fully appreciated the scale of his gamble. If successful, this
phase of assault would virtually guarantee an overall Imperial victory for the campaign. If it failed, his whole
crusade force, an armed host over a billion strong, might well be entirely overrun. For two bloody, bitter years,
the fate of the Sabbat Worlds Crusade hung in the balance.
Serious analysis of this period inevitably focuses on the large-scale fortress-world theatres, most particularly
on the eighteen month war to take the massive fortress-world Morlond. But several of the subsidiary crusade
assaults conducted during this phase are deserving of close study, especially the liberation of the shrineworld
Hagia and the remarkable events that afterwards unfolded there…
—from A History of the Later Imperial Crusades
ONE
A DAY FOR HEROES
“Betwixt the wash of the river and the waft of the wind, let my sins be transfigured to virtues.”
—Catechism of Hagia, bk I, chp 3, vrs XXXII
They’d strung the king up with razor wire in a city square north of the river.
It was called the Square of Sublime Tranquillity, an eight-hectare court of sun-baked, pink basalt surrounded by
the elegant, mosaic walls of the Universitariate Doctrinus. Little in the way of sublime tranquillity had happened
there in the last ten days. The Pater’s Pilgrims had seen to that.
Ibram Gaunt made a sharp, bat-like shadow on the flagstones as he ran to new cover, his storm coat flying out
behind him. The sun was at its highest and a stark glare scorched the hard ground. Gaunt knew the light must be
burning his skin too, but he felt nothing except the cool, blustering wind that filled the wide square.
He dropped into shelter behind an overturned, burnt-out Chimera troop carrier, and dumped the empty clip from
his bolt pistol with a flick-click of his gloved thumb. He could hear a popping sound from far away, and raw metal
dents appeared in the blackened armour of the dead Chimera’s hull. Distant shots, their sound stolen by the wind.
Far behind, across the cooking pink stones of the open square, he could see black-uniformed Imperial Guardsmen
edging out to follow him.
His men. Troopers of the Tanith First-and-Only. Gaunt noted their dispersal and glanced back at the king. The high
king indeed, as he had been. What was his name again?
Rotten, swollen, humiliated, the noble corpse swung from a gibbet made of tie-beams and rusting truck-axles and
couldn’t answer. Most of his immediate court and family were dangling next to him.
More popping. A hard, sharp dent appeared in the resilient metal next to Gaunt’s head. Crumbs of paint flecked off
with the impact.
Mkoll ducked into cover beside him, lasrifle braced.
“Took your time,” Gaunt teased.
“Hah! I trained you too fething well, colonel-commissar, that’s all it is.” They grinned at each other.
More troopers joined them, running the gauntlet across the open square. One jerked and fell, halfway across. His
body would remain, sprawled and unmourned in the open, for at least another hour.
Larkin, Caffran, Lillo, Vamberfeld and Derin made it across. The five scurried in beside the Ghosts’ leader and
Mkoll, the regiment’s scout commander.
Gaunt assayed a look out past the Chimera cover.
He ducked back as distant pops threw rounds at him.
“Four shooters. In the north-west corner.”
Mkoll smiled and shook his head, scolding like a parent. “Nine at least. Haven’t you listened to anything I’ve told
you, Gaunt?”
Larkin, Derin and Caffran laughed. They were all Tanith, original Ghosts, veterans.
Lillo and Vamberfeld watched the apparently disrespectful exchange with alarm. They were Vervunhivers,
newcomers to the Ghosts regiment. The Tanith called them “fresh blood” if they were being charitable, “scratchers”
if they weren’t really thinking, or “cannon trash” if they were feeling cruel.
The new Vervunhive recruits wore the same matt-black fatigues and body armour as the Tanith, but their colouring
and demeanour stood them apart.
As did their newly stamped, metal-stocked lasguns and the special silver axe-rake studs they wore on their
collars.
“Don’t worry,” said Gaunt, noting their unease and smiling. “Mkoll regularly gets too big for his boots. I’ll
reprimand him when this is done.”
More pops, more dents.
Larkin fidgeted round to get a good look, resting his fine, nalwood-finished sniper weapon in a jag of broken
armour with experienced grace. He was the regiment’s best marksman.
“Got a target?” Gaunt asked.
“Oh, you bet,” assured the grizzled Larkin, working his weapon into optimum position with a lover’s softness.
“Blow their fething faces off then, if you please.”
“You got it.”
“How… How can he see?” gasped Lillo, craning up. Caffran tugged him into cover, saving him an abrupt death as
las-shots hissed around them.
“Sharpest eyes of all the Ghosts,” smiled Caffran.
Lillo nodded back, but resented the Tanith’s cocky attitude. He was Marco Lillo, career soldier, twenty-one years
in the Vervun Primary, and here was a kid, no more than twenty years old all told, telling him what to do.
Lillo shuffled round, aiming his long lasgun.
“I want the king, high king whatever-his-name-is,” said Gaunt softly. Distractedly, he rubbed at a ridge of an old
scar across his right palm. “I want him down. It’s not right for him to be rotting up there.”
“Okay,” said Mkoll.
Lillo thought he had a shot and fired a sustained burst at the far side of the square. Lattice windows along the side
of the Universitariat exploded inwards, but the hard breeze muffled the noise of the impacts.
Gaunt grabbed Lillo’s weapon and pulled him down.
“Don’t waste ammo, Marco,” he said.
He knows my name! He knows my name! Lillo was almost beside himself with the fact. He stared at Gaunt,
basking in every moment of the brief acknowledgement. Ibram Gaunt was like a god to him. He had led Vervunhive
to victory out of the surest defeat ten months past. He carried the sword to prove it.
Lillo regarded the colonel-commissar now: the tall, powerful build, the close-cropped blond hair half hidden by
the commissar’s cap, the lean cut of his intense face that so matched his name. Gaunt was dressed in the black
uniform of his breed, overtopped by a long, leather storm coat and the trademark Tanith camo-cape. Maybe not a
god, because he’s flesh and blood, Lillo thought… but a hero, none the less.
Larkin was firing. Hard, scratchy rasps issued from his gun.
The rate of fire spitting over their ducked heads reduced.
“What are we waiting for?” asked Vamberfeld.
Mkoll caught his sleeve and nodded back at the buildings behind them.
Vamberfeld saw a big man… a very big man… rise from cover and fire a missile launcher.
The snaking missile, trailing smoke, struck a coronet on the west of the square.
“Try again, Bragg!” Derin, Mkoll and Larkin chorused with a laugh.
Another missile soared over them, and blew the far corner of the square apart. Stone debris scattered across the
open plaza.
Gaunt was up and running now, as were Mkoll, Caffran and Derin. Larkin continued to fire his expert shots from
cover.
Vamberfeld and Lillo leapt up after the Tanith.
Lillo saw Derin buckle and fall as las-fire cut through him.
He paused and tried to help. The Tanith trooper’s chest was a bloody mess and he was convulsing so hard it was
impossible for Lillo to get a good grip on him. Mkoll appeared beside the struggling Lillo and together they dragged
Derin into cover behind the makeshift gibbet as more las-fire peppered the flagstones.
Gaunt, Caffran and Vamberfeld made it to the far corner of the square.
Gaunt disappeared in through the jagged hole that Bragg’s missile had made, his power sword raised and
humming. It was the ceremonial weapon of Heironymo Sondar, once-lord of Vervunhive, and Gaunt now carried it as
a mark of honour for his courageous defence of that hive. The keening, electric-blue blade flashed as it struck at
shapes inside the hole.
Caffran ducked in after him, blasting from the hip. Few of the Ghosts were better than him in storm clearance. He
was fast and ruthless.
He blocked Gaunt’s back, gun flaring.
Niceg Vamberfeld had been a commercia cleric on Verghast before the Art of Consolation. He’d trained hard, and
well, but this was all new to him. He followed the pair inside, plunging into a suddenly gloomy world of shadows,
shadow-shapes and blazing energy weapons.
He shot something point blank as he came through the crumpled stone opening. Something else reared up at him,
cackling, and he lanced it with his bayonet. He couldn’t see the commissar-colonel or the young Tanith trooper
anymore. He couldn’t see a gakking thing, in fact. He started to panic. Something else shot at him from close range
and a las-round spat past his ear.
He fired again, blinded by the close shot, and heard a dead weight fall.
Something grabbed him from behind.
There was an impact, and a spray of dust and blood. Vamberfeld fell over clumsily, a corpse on top of him. Face
down in the hot dirt, Vamberfeld found his vision returning. He was suffused in blue light.
Power sword smoking, Ibram Gaunt dragged him up by the hand.
“Good work, Vamberfeld. We’ve taken the breach,” he said.
Vamberfeld was dumbstruck. And also covered in blood.
“Stay sane,” Gaunt told him, “It gets better…”
They were in a cloister, or a circumambulatory, as far as the dazed Verghastite could tell. Bright shafts of sunlight
stippled down through the complex sandstone lattices, but the main window sections were screened with ornately
mosaiced wood panels. The air was dry and dead, and rich with the afterscents of las-fire, fyceline and fresh blood.
Vamberfeld could see Gaunt and Caffran moving ahead, Caffran hugging the cloister walls and searching for
targets as Gaunt perused the enemy dead.
The dead. The dreaded Infardi.
When they had seized Hagia, the Chaos forces had taken the name Infardi, which meant “pilgrims” in the local
language, and adopted a green silk uniform that mocked the shrineworld’s religion. The name was meant to mock it
too; by choosing a name in the local tongue, the enemy were defiling the very sanctity of the place. For six thousand
years, this had been the shrineworld of Saint Sabbat, one of the most beloved of Imperial saints, after whom this
entire star cluster — and this Imperial crusade — were named. By taking Hagia and proclaiming themselves
pilgrims, the foe were committing the ultimate desecration. What unholy rites they had conducted here in Hagia’s
holy places did not bear thinking about.
Vamberfeld had learned all about Pater Sin and his Chaos filth from the regimental briefings on the troop ship.
Seeing it was something else. He glanced at the corpse nearest him: a large, gnarled man swathed in green silk
wraps. Where the wraps parted or were torn away, Vamberfeld could see a wealth of tattoos: images of Saint Sabbat
in grotesque congress with lascivious daemons, images of hell, runes of Chaos overstamping and polluting blessed
symbols.
He felt light-headed. Despite the months of training he had endured after joining the Ghosts, he was still out of
shape: a desk-bound cleric playing at being soldier.
His panic deepened.
Caffran was suddenly firing again, splintering the dark with his muzzle-flashes. Vamberfeld couldn’t see Gaunt
anymore. He threw himself flat on his belly and propped his gun as Colonel Corbec had taught him during
Fundamental and Preparatory. His shots rattled up the colonnade past Caffran, supporting the young Tanith’s salvoes.
Ahead, a flock of figures in shimmering green flickered down the cloister, firing lasguns and automatic hard-slug
weapons at them. Vamberfeld could hear chanting too.
Chanting wasn’t the right word, he realised. As they approached, the figures were murmuring, muttering long and
complex phrases that overlapped and intertwined. He felt the sweat on his back go cold. He fired again. These
troops were Infardi, the elite of Pater Sin. Emperor save him, he was in it up to his neck!
Gaunt dropped to his knee next to him, aiming and firing his bolt pistol in a two-handed brace The trio of Imperial
guns pummelled the Infardi advance in the narrow space.
There was a flash and a dull roar, and then light streamed in ahead of them, cutting into the side of the Infardi
charge. Blowing another breach in the cloister, more Ghosts poured in, slaughtering the advancing foe.
Gaunt rose. The half-seen fighting ahead was sporadic now. He keyed his microbead intercom.
There was a click of static that Vamberfeld felt in his own earpiece, then: “One, this is three. Clearing the space.”
A pause, gunfire. “Clearance confirmed.”
“One, three. Good work, Rawne. Fan inward and secure the precinct of the Universitariat.”
“Three, acknowledged.”
Gaunt looked down at Vamberfeld. “You can get up now,” he said.
Dizzy, his heart pounding, Vamberfeld almost fell back out into the sunlight and wind of the square. He thought he
might pass out, or worse, vomit. He stood with his back to the hot cloister stonework and breathed deeply, aware of
how cold his skin was.
He tried to find something to focus his attention on. Above the stupa and gilt domes of the Universitariat thousands
of flags, pennants and banners fluttered in the eternal wind of Hagia. He had been told the faithful raised them in the
belief that by inscribing their sins onto the banners they would have them blown away and absolved. There were so
many… so many colours, shapes, designs…
Vamberfeld looked away.
The Square of Sublime Tranquillity was now full of advancing Ghosts, a hundred or more, spilling out across the
pink flagstones, checking doors and cloister entranceways. A large group had formed around the gibbet where Mkoll
was cutting the corpses down.
Vamberfeld slid down the wall until he was sitting on the stone flags of the square. He began to shake. He was
still shaking when the medics found him.
Mkoll, Lillo and Larkin were lowering the king’s pitiful corpse when Gaunt approached. The colonel-commissar
looked dourly at the tortured remains. Kings were two a penny on Hagia: a feudal world, controlled by city-states in
the name of the hallowed God-Emperor, and every town had a king. But the king of Doctrinopolis, Hagia’s first city,
was the most exalted, the closest Hagia had to a planetary lord, and to see the highest officer of the Imperium
disfigured so gravely offended Gaunt’s heart.
“Infareem Infardus,” Gaunt muttered, remembering at last the high king’s name from his briefing slates. He took off
his cap and bowed his head. “May the beloved Emperor rest you.”
“What do we do with them, sir?” Mkoll asked, gesturing to the miserable bodies.
“Whatever local custom decrees,” Gaunt answered. He looked about. “Trooper! Over here!”
Trooper Brin Milo, the youngest Ghost, came running over at his commander’s cry. The only civilian saved from
Tanith, saved by Gaunt personally, Milo had served as Gaunt’s adjutant until he had been old enough to join the
ranks. All the Ghosts respected his close association with the colonel-commissar. Though an ordinary trooper, Milo
was held in special regard.
Personally, Milo hated the fact that he was seen as a lucky charm.
“Sir?”
“I want you to find some of the locals, priests especially, and learn from them how they wish these bodies to be
treated. I want it done according to their custom, Brin.”
Milo nodded and saluted. “I’ll see to it sir.”
Gaunt turned away. Beyond the majestic Universitariat and the clustering roofs of the Doctrinopolis rose the
Citadel, a vast white marble palace capping a high rock plateau. Pater Sin, the unholy intelligence behind the heretic
army that had taken the Doctrinopolis, the commanding presence behind the entire enemy forces on this world, was
up there somewhere. The Citadel was the primary objective, but getting to it was proving to be a slow, bloody effort
for the Imperial forces as they claimed their way through the Doctrinopolis street by street.
Gaunt called up his vox-officer, Raglon, and ordered him to patch links with the second and third fronts. Raglon
had just reached Colonel Farris, commander of the Brevian Centennials at the sharp end of the third front pushing in
through the north of the city, when they heard fresh firing from the Universitariat. Rawne’s unit had engaged the
enemy again.
Four kilometres east, in the narrow streets of the quarter known as Old Town, the Tanith second front was locked in
hard. Old Town was a warren of maze-like streets that wound between high, teetering dwellings linking small
commercial yards and larger market places. A large number of Infardi, driven out of the defences on the holy river by
the initial push of the Imperial armour, had gone to ground here.
It was bitter stuff, house to house, dwelling to dwelling, street to street. But the Tanith Ghosts, masters of stealth,
excelled at street fighting.
Colonel Colm Corbec, the Ghost’s second-in-command, was a massive, genial, shaggy brute beloved of his men.
His good humour and rousing passion drove them forward; his fortitude and power inspired them. He held command
by dint of sheer charisma, perhaps even more than Gaunt did, certainly more than Major Rawne, the regiment’s
cynical, ruthlessly efficient third officer.
Right now, Corbec couldn’t use any of that charismatic leadership. Pinned by sustained las-fire behind a street
corner drinking trough, he was cursing freely. The microbead intercom system worn by all Guardsmen was being
blocked and distorted by the high buildings all around.
“Two! This is two! Respond, any troop units!” Corbec barked, fumbling with his rubber-sheathed earpiece.
“Come on! Come on!”
A drizzle of las-blasts rocked the old sandstone water-tub, scattering chips of stone. Corbec ducked again.
“Two! This is two! Come on!”
Corbec had his head buried against the base of the water-tub. He could smell damp stone. He saw, in sharp focus,
tiny spiders clinging to filmy cones of web in the tub’s bas-relief carvings, inches from his eyes.
He felt the warm stone shudder against his cheek as las-rounds hit the other side.
His microbead gurgled something, but the broken transmission was drowned by the noise of a tin ladle and two
earthenware jugs falling off the edge of the trough.
“Say again! Say again!”
“—chief, we—”
“Again! This is two! Say again!”
“—to the west, we—”
Corbec growled a colourful oath and tore out his earpiece. He sneaked a look around the edge of the tub and threw
himself back.
A single lasround whipped past, exploding against the wall behind him. It would have taken his head off if he
hadn’t moved.
Corbec rolled back onto his arse, his back against the tub, and checked his lasrifle. The curved magazine of the
wooden-stocked weapon was two-thirds dry, so he pulled it out and snapped in a fresh one. The right-hand thigh
pocket of his body armour was heavy with half-used dips. He always changed up to full-load when there was a
chance. The half-spent were there at hand for dug-in resistance. He’d known more than one trooper who’d died when
his cell had drained out in the middle of a firelight, when there was no time to reload.
There was a burst of firing ahead of him. Corbec spun, and noted the change in tone. The dull snap of the Infardi
weapons was intermingled with the higher, piercing reports of Imperial guns.
He lifted his head above the edge of the tub. When he didn’t get it shot off, he rolled up onto his feet and ran down
the narrow alleyway.
There was fighting ahead. He leapt over the body of an Infardi sprawled in a doorway. The curving street was
narrow and the dwellings on either side were tall. He hurried between hard shadow and patches of sunlight.
He came up behind three Ghosts, firing from cover across a market yard. One was a big man he recognised at
once, even from the back.
“Kolea!”
Sergeant Gol Kolea was an ex-miner who’d fought through the Vervunhive war as a part of the “scratch company”
resistance. No one, not even the most war-weary and cynical Tanith, had anything but respect for the man and his
selfless determination. The Verghastites practically worshipped him. He was a driven, quiet giant, almost the size of
Corbec himself.
The colonel slid into cover beside him. “What’s new, sarge?” Corbec grinned over the roar of weaponsfire.
“Nothing,” replied Kolea. Corbec liked the man immensely, but he had to admit the ex-miner had no sense of
humour. In the months since the new recruits had joined the Ghosts, Corbec hadn’t managed to engage Kolea at all in
small talk or personal chat, and he was pretty sure none of the others had managed it either. But then the battle for
Vervunhive had taken his wife and children, so Corbec imagined Kolea didn’t have much to laugh or chat about
anymore.
Kolea pointed out over the crates of rotting produce they were using as cover.
“We’re tight in here. They hold the buildings over the market and west down that street.”
As if to prove this, a flurry of hard-round and laser fire spattered down across their position.
“Feth,” sighed Corbec. “That place over there is crawling with them.”
“I think it’s the merchant guild hall. They’re up on the fourth floor in serious numbers.”
Corbec rubbed his whiskers. “So we can’t go over. What’s to the sides?”
“I tried that, sir.” It was Corporal Meryn, one of the other Ghosts crouched in the cover. “Sneaked off left to find a
side alley.”
“Result?”
“Almost got my arse shot off.”
“Thanks for trying,” Corbec nodded.
Chuckling, Meryn turned back to his spot-shooting.
Corbec crawled along the cover, passing the third Ghost, Wheln, and ducked under a metal handcart used by the
market’s produce workers. He looked the market yard up and down. On his side of it, Kolea, Meryn and Wheln had
the alley end covered, and three further squads of Ghosts had taken firing positions in the lower storeys of the
commercial premises to either side. Through a blown-out window, he could see Sergeant Bray and several others.
Opposing them, a salient of Infardi troops was dug into the whole streetblock. Corbec studied the area well, and
took in other details besides. He had always held that brains won wars faster than bombs. Then again, he also
believed that when it really came down to it, fighting your balls off never hurt.
You’re a complex man, Sergeant Varl had once told him. He’d been taking the piss of course, and they’d both been
off their heads on sacra. The memory made Colm Corbec smile.
Head down, Corbec sprinted to the neighbouring building, a potter’s shop. Shattered porcelain and china
fragments littered the ground inside and out. He paused near a shell hole in the side wall and called.
“Hey, inside! It’s Corbec! I’m coming in so don’t hose me with las!”
He swung inside.
In the old shop, troopers Rilke, Yael and Leyr were dug in, firing through the lowered window shutters. The
shutters were holed in what seemed to Corbec to be a million places and just as many individual beams of light
shafted in through them, catching the haze of smoke that lifted through the dark shop’s air.
“Having fun, boys?” Corbec asked. They muttered various comments about the wanton proclivities of his mother
and several other of his female relatives.
“Good to hear you’re keeping your spirits up,” he replied. He began stamping on the pottery-covered floor.
“What the sacred feth are you doing, chief?” asked Yael. He was a youngster, no more than twenty-two, with a
youngster’s insubordinate cheek. Corbec liked that spirit a lot.
“Using my head, sonny,” smiled Corbec, pointing to his size eighteen field boot as he stomped it again.
Corbec raked away some china spoil and dragged up a floor-hatch by the metal yoke.
“Cellar,” he announced. The trio groaned.
He let the hatch slam down and crawled up to the window with them.
“Think about it my brave Tanith studs. Take a look out there.”
They did, peering though the shredded shutter-slats.
“The market’s raised… a raised podium. See there by that pile of drums? Gotta be a hatch. My money’s on a
warren of produce cellars under this whole market… and probably under that guild hall too.”
“My money’s on you getting us all dead by lunchtime,” growled Leyr, a hard-edged, thirty-five year old veteran of
the Tanith Magna militia.
“Have I got you dead yet?” asked Corbec.
“That’s not the point—”
“Then shut up and listen. We’ll be here til doomsday unless we break this deadlock. So let’s fight smart. Use the
fact this cess-pit of a city is a trazillion years old and full of basements, crypts and catacombs.”
He keyed his microbead intercom, adjusting the thin wire arm of the mike so it was close to his lips.
“This is two. You hearing me, six?”
“Six, two. Yes I am.”
“Bray, keep your men where they are and give the front of that hall a good seeing to in about… oh, ten minutes.
Can you do that?”
“Six, got it. Firestorm in ten.”
“Good on you. Two, nine?”
“Nine, two.” Corbec heard Kolea’s tight voice over the channel.
“Sarge, I’m in the pottery vendor’s down from you. Leave Meryn and Wheln put and get over here.”
“Got you.”
Kolea scrambled in through the shell hole a few seconds later. He found Corbec shining his lamp-pack into the
open cellar hatch.
“You know about tunnels, right?”
“Mines. I was a miner.”
“Same difference, it’s all underground. Prep, we’re going down.” He turned to Leyr, Rilke and Yael. “Who’s got a
yen for adventure and a satchel full of tube-charges?”
Again, they groaned.
“You’re safe, Rilke. I want you popping at those windows.” Rilke was a superb sniper, second only to the
regimental marksmanship champion Larkin. He had a long-pattern needle-las. “Give up any tubes you got to these
plucky volunteers.”
Leyr and Yael moved back to the hatch. Each of them, like Corbec and Kolea, wore twenty kilos of matt-black
composite body armour over their fatigues and under their camo-cloaks. Most of that weight came from the modular
webbing pouches filled with ammo, lamp-packs, sheathed blades, waterproof microbead sets, coiled climbing rope,
rolls of surgical tape, ferro-plastic binders, Founding-issue Imperial texts, door-spikes, flashbombs, and all the rest
of the standard issue Imperial Guard kit.
“Gonna be tight,” mused Leyr sourly, looking down into the hole where Kolea’s flashlight played.
Kolea nodded and pulled off his camo-cloak. “Ditch anything that will get hung up.” Leyr and Yael did so, as did
Corbec himself. The cloaks went onto the floor, as did other loose items. All four copies of the Imperial
Infantryman’s Uplifting Primer hit the cloaks at the same time.
The men looked at Corbec, almost ashamed.
“Ahh, it’s all up here,” Corbec said, tapping his temple.
Sergeant Kolea tamped a spike into the tiled floor and ran the end of his climbing rope through the eye. He
dropped the snake of cable down into the hole.
“Who’s first?” he asked.
Corbec would have preferred to let Kolea lead, but this was his call and he wanted them to know he trusted it.
He grabbed the rope, slung his lasrifle over his shoulder, and clambered down into the hole.
Kolea followed, then Leyr. Yael brought up the rear.
The cellar shaft was eight metres deep. Almost immediately, Corbec was struggling and sweating. Even though he
had ditched a lot of kit, the sheer bulk of his webbing and body armour was confining him and screwing with his
centre of balance.
He landed on a floor in the darkness and switched on his lamp-pack. The air was thick and foetid. He was in a
cellar space four metres wide, dripping with ancient fluid and rot. His boots sloshed through semi-solid waste and
murk.
“Oh feth!” spat Leyr as he made the ground.
There was an arched conduit snaking off towards the underyard. It was less than a metre high and only half a metre
wide. With kit and weapons, even stripped down, they had to hunch and edge in sideways, single file. The liquid
ooze on the floor sucked up around their boot-tops.
Corbec attached his lamp-pack to the bayonet fitting under his lasgun’s muzzle. He swung the weapon back and
forth as best he could side on, bent over, and led them on into the soupy darkness.
“Probably wasn’t the best idea in the galaxy to send either of us on this,” said Kolea behind him.
It was the closest Corbec had ever heard to a joke from the scratch sergeant. Apart from “Try Again” Bragg, he
and Kolea were the biggest men in the Tanith First. Neither Leyr and Yael topped out over two metres.
Corbec smiled. “How did you manage? In the mines?”
Kolea slid round, passing Corbec in an awkward hunch. “We crawled when the seams dipped. But there are other
ways. Watch me.”
Corbec shone his light onto Kolea so that he and the two Tanith behind him could see. Kolea leaned back against
the conduit wall until he was almost in a sitting position. Then he skirted along through the muck, bracing his back
against the wall so that the top half of his body could remain upright. His feet ran against the foot of the far wall to
prevent him slipping out.
“Very saucy,” said Corbec in admiration.
He followed suit, and so did Leyr and Yael. The quartet slid their way down the conduit. Overhead, through the
thick stone, they heard heavy fire. The ten minutes were up. Bray had begun his promised firestorm.
They were behind, too slow.
The conduit fanned and then opened out into a wide box. The stinking ooze was knee deep. Their flashlights found
bas-relief markers of old saints on the walls.
At least the roof was higher here.
Straightening up, they headed forward through the tarry fluid. They were directly under the centre of the market
yard now, by Corbec’s estimation.
Another conduit led away towards what he presumed was the guild hall. Now Corbec led the way, double-time,
back-crawling down the low conduit as Kolea had taught them.
They came on a shaft leading up.
By flashlight, they could see the sides were smooth brick, but the shaft was narrow, no more than a metre square.
By force of thighs alone, it was possible to edge up the shaft with back braced against one wall and feet against
the other. Corbec led again.
Granting and sweating, he climbed the shaft until his face was a few centimetres from a wooden hatch.
He looked down at Kolea, Yael and Leyr spidered into the flue below him.
“Here goes,” he said.
He pushed the hatch up. It didn’t budge initially, then it slumped open. Light shone down. Corbec waited for
gunfire but none came. He shuffled up the last of the shaft, shoulderblade by shoulderblade, and pushed out into the
open.
He was in the guild hall basement. It was boarded up and empty, and there were several corpses on the floor,
drizzled with flies.
Corbec pulled himself out of the shaft into the room. The others followed.
Rising, their legs wet and stinking from the passage, they moved out lasguns ready, lamp-packs extinguished.
The percussive throb of las-fire rolled from the floor above.
Yael checked the corpses. “Infardi scum,” he told the colonel. “Left to die.”
“Let’s help their pals join them,” Corbec smiled.
The four took the brick stairs in the basement corner as a pack, guns ready. A battered wooden door stood between
them and the first floor.
His foot braced against the door, Corbec looked back at the three Ghosts clustered behind him.
“What do you say? A day for heroes?”
All three nodded. He kicked in the door.

TWO
SERVANTS OF THE SLAIN
“Let the sky welcome you, for therein dwells the Emperor and his saints.”
—Saint Sabbat, proverbs
Brin Milo, his lasgun slung muzzle-down over his shoulder, made his way against the press of traffic approaching the
square from the south. Detachments of Tanith and light mechanised support from the Eighth Pardus Armoured were
pouring into the Universitariat district from the fighting zones to the south-west moving in to support the commissar’s
push. Milo ducked into doorways as troop carriers and Hydra batteries grumbled past and slid sideways to pass
platoons marching four abreast.
Friends and comrades called greetings to him as they moved by, a few breaking step to quiz him on the front
ahead. Most of them were caked in pink dust and sweating, but morale was generally high. Fighting had been intense
during the last fortnight but the Imperial forces had made great gains.
“Hey, Brinny-boy! What lies in store?” Sergeant Varl called, the squad of men with him slowing into a huddle that
blocked the street.
“Light stuff, the commissar’s opened it up. The Universitariat is thick with them though, I think. Rawne’s gone in.”
Varl nodded, but questions from some of his men were drowned by an air horn.
“Come on, move aside!” yelled a Pardus officer, rising up in the open cab of his Salamander command vehicle. A
line of flamer tanks and tubby siege gun platforms was bottling up behind him. More horns sounded and the coughing
motors raised pink dust in the air of the narrow street.
“Come on!”
“All right, feth it!” Varl responded, waving his men back against the street wall. The Pardus machines rumbled
past.
“I’ll try and leave some glory for you, Varl!” the armour officer called out, standing in the rear of his bucking
machine and throwing a mock salute as he went by.
“We’ll be along to rescue you in a minute, Horkan!” Varl returned, raising a single digit in response to the salute
that all the Tanith in his squad immediately mimicked.
Brin Milo smiled. The Pardus were a good lot, and such horseplay typified the good humour with which they and
the Tanith co-operated in this advance.
Behind the light armour came Trojans and other tractor units hauling heavy munitions and stowed field artillery,
then Tanith pushing handcarts liberated from the weavers’ barns. The carts were laden with ammunition boxes and
tanks of promethium for the flamers. Varl’s men were called over to help lift a cart out of a drain gutter and Milo
moved on.
Hurrying against the flow of men and munitions, the young trooper reached the arch of the great red-stone bridge
over the river. Shell holes decorated its ancient surface, and sappers from the Pardus regiment were hanging over the
sides on ropes, shoring up its structure and sweeping for explosives. In this part of the Doctrinopolis, the river
surged through a deep, man-made channel, its sides formed by the basalt river walls and the sides of the buildings.
The smooth water was a deep green, deeper than the shade of the Infardi robes. A sacred river, Milo had been told.
Milo took directions from the Tanith corporal directing traffic at the junction, and left the main thoroughfare by a
flight of steps that brought him down onto a riverwall path leading under the bridge itself. The water lapped at the
stone three metres below and reflected ripples of white off the dark underside of the bridge.
He made his way to an archway overlooking the water further along the wall. It was the river entrance to one of
the lesser shrines and tired, hungry-looking locals loitered around the entrance.
The shrine had been turned into a makeshift hospital early in the assault by local physicians and priests, and now,
on Gaunt’s orders, Imperial medical personnel had moved in to take charge.
Troops and civilians were being treated side by side.
“Lesp? Where’s the doc?” Milo asked, striding into the lamp-lit gloom and finding the lean Tanith orderly at work
sewing up a Pardus trooper’s scalp laceration.
“In the back there,” Lesp replied, blotting the sutured wound with a swab of alcohol-soaked doth. Stretcher parties
were arriving all the time, mostly with civilian injured, and the long, arched shrine was filling up. Lesp looked
harried.
“Doctor? Doctor?” Milo called. He saw Hagian priests and volunteers in cream robes working alongside the
Imperial medics, and attending to the particular customs and rites of their own people. Army chaplains from the
Ecclesiarchy were ministering to the needs of the off-world Imperials.
“Who’s calling for a doctor?” asked a figure nearby. She rose, straightening her faded red smock.
“Me,” said Milo. “I was looking for Dorden.”
“He’s in the field. Old Town,” said Surgeon Ana Curth. “I’m in charge here.” Curth was a Verghastite who had
joined the Tanith along with the Vervunhive soldiery at the Act of Consolation. She’d taken to combat trauma well
during the hive-siege and Chief Medic Dorden had been amazed and grateful at her decision to join.
“Will I do?” she asked.
“The commissar sent me,” answered Milo with a nod. “They’ve found…” he dropped his voice and steered her
into a private corner. “They’ve found the local lord. A king, I think. He’s dead. Gaunt wants his body dealt with
according to local custom. Dutiful respect, that sort of thing.”
“Not really my field,” Curth said.
“No, but I figured you or the doc might have got to know some of the locals. Priests, maybe.”
She brushed her fringe out of her eyes and led him through the infirmary crowds to where a Hagian girl in the
coarse cream robes of a scholar was re-dressing a throat wound.
“Sanian?” The girl looked up. She had the long-boned, strong-featured look of the local population, with dark eyes
and well-defined eyebrows. Her head was shaved except for a bound pony-tail of glossy black hair hanging from the
back of her skull.
“Surgeon Curth?” Her voice was thin but musical.
She’s no older than me, Milo thought, but with the severe shaved head it was difficult to guess an age.
“Trooper Milo here has been sent by our commanding officer to find someone with a good knowledge of Hagian
lore.”
“I’ll help if I can.”
“Tell her what you need, Milo,” said Curth.
Milo and the Hagian girl went out of the hospital into the hard sunlight of the river wall. She put her hands together
and made brief nods of respect to the river and the sky before turning to him.
“You’re a doctor?” Milo asked.
“No.”
“Part of the priesthood, then?”
“No. I am a student, from the Universitariat.” She gestured to her pony-tail. “The braids mark our station in life.
We are called esholi.”
“What subject do you study?”
“All subjects, of course. Medicine, music, astrography, the sacred texts… is that not the way on your world?”
Milo shook his head. “I have no world now. But when I did, students at advanced levels specialised in their
study.”
“How… strange.”
“And when you’ve finished your study, what will you become?”
She looked at him quizzically.
“Become? I have become what I will become. Esholi. Study lasts a lifetime.”
“Oh.” He paused. A line of Trojans rattled by over the bridge above them. “Look, I have some bad news. Your
king is dead.”
The Hagian put her hands to her mouth and bowed her head.
“I’m sorry,” Milo said, feeling awkward. “My commander wants to know what should be properly done to… to
care for his remains.”
“We must find the ayatani.”
“The who?”
“The priests.”
A wailing noise made Rawne swing round, but it was only the wind.
He felt the movement of air against his face, gusting down the stone hallways and vaults of the Universitariat.
Many windows had been blown out and shell holes put through the walls, and now the windy air of Hagia was
getting in.
He stood for a thoughtful moment stealth cape swept back over one shoulder, lasgun slouched barrel-down across
his belly staring into…
Well, he didn’t rightly know what. A large room, scorched and burned out, the twisted, blackened limbs of fused
sconces adhering to the sooty walls like stomped spiders. Millions of glass fragments littered the burnt floor. There
were seared tufts of carpeting around the room edges.
What great purpose this room had once had was no longer important. It was empty. It was clear. That was all that
mattered.
Rawne turned and went back out into the hallway. The wind, leaking through shell holes and exposed rafters,
whined after him.
His clearance squad moved up. Feygor, Bragg, Mkillian, Waed, Caffran.. and the women.
Major Rawne still hadn’t sorted his head out about the women. There were a fair number of them, Verghastites
who had elected to join the Ghosts during the Act of Consolation.
They could fight — feth!—he knew that much. They’d all been baptised in combat during the war for Vervunhive,
common workers and habbers forced into fighting roles.
But still they were women. Rawne had tried to speak to Gaunt about it, but the colonel-commissar had droned on
about various illustrious mixed or all female units in Guard history blah blah blah and Rawne had pretty much
blanked him out.
He wasn’t interested in history. He was interested in the future. And in being there to enjoy it.
Women in the regiment put a strain on them all. Cracks were already showing. There had been a few minor brawls
on the troop ships: Verghastite men protecting the “honour” of their women; men falling out over women; women
fighting off men…
It was a powder keg and soon there’d be more than a few split lips and broken teeth to show for it.
Bottom line was, Rawne had never really trusted women much. And he’d certainly never trusted men who put too
much trust in women.
Caffran, for example. One of the youngest Ghosts: compact, strong, a fine soldier. On Verghast, he’d gotten
involved with a local girl and they’d been inseparable ever since. A couple, would you believe? And Rawne knew
for a fact the girl had a pair of young children who were cared for amongst the other non-combatants and campfollowers
in the regimental escort ships.
Her name was Tona Criid. She was eighteen, lean and hard, with spiky bleached hair and gang tattoos that spoke
of a rough life even before the Vervunhive war. Rawne watched her as she walked with Caffran down the shattered
Universitariat hallway, covering each other, checking doors and alcoves. She moved with easy grace. She knew what
she was doing. The black Ghost uniform fitted her well. She was… good-looking.
Rawne turned away and scratched behind his ear. These women were going to be the death of someone.
The clearance squad prowled forward, picking their way down empty halls over the glass of broken windows and
the kindling of shattered furniture. Rawne found himself moving level with the other female in his squad. Her name
was Banda, an ex-loom worker from Vervunhive who’d fought in the famous guerilla company run by Gol Kolea.
She was lively, playful, impetuous with close-cut curly brown hair and a figure that was a tad more rounded and
feminine than that of the lithe ganger Criid.
Rawne signalled her on with a silent gesture and she did so, with a nod and a wink.
A wink!
You didn’t wink at your commanding officer!
Rawne was about to call a halt and shout into her face when Waed signalled.
Everyone fell into shadows and cover, pressing against the hallway walls. They were reaching a turn. A wooden,
red-painted door lay ahead, closed, and then further down the corridor, around the turn, there was an archway. The
carpet in the halls had been racked up and was stained and stiff with dried blood.
“Waed?”
“Movement. In the archway,” Waed whispered back. “Feygor?”
Rawne’s adjutant, the ruthless Feygor, nodded to confirm. Rawne gestured some orders in quick succession.
Feygor and Waed moved up, hunched low, hugging the right-hand wall. Bragg took the corner as cover and got his
big autocannon braced. Banda and Mkillian went up the left side of the corridor until they reached the cover of a
hardwood ottoman pushed against the wall.
Caffran and Criid slung their lasrifles over their shoulders, drew their blunt-nosed laspistols and went to the red
door. If, as seemed likely, it opened into the same room as the archway, this could open their field of fire. And
double checking it covered their arses.
Total silence. They were all Ghosts, moving with a Ghost’s practiced stealth.
Caffran grasped the door handle, turned it, but didn’t open it. He held it fast as Criid leaned down and put her ear
to the red-painted wood. Rawne saw how she brushed her bleached hair out of the way to do it. He-He was going to
have to fething concentrate, he realised.
Criid looked round and made the open-handed sign for “no sound”.
Rawne nodded, made sure all the squad could see him, raised three fingers and then dropped them one by one.
As the third finger dropped, Criid and Caffran went through the door low and fast. They found themselves in a
large stone chamber that had once been a scriptorium before rockets had blown out the vast lancet windows opposite
the door and shattered the wooden desks and writing tables. Caffran and Criid dropped for cover amid the twisted
wooden wreckage. Las-shots spat their way from an archway at the far end of the room.
At the sound of gunfire from the room, Rawne’s team opened up at the corridor arch. Fire was hastily returned.
“Caffran! What have you got?” Rawne snarled into his vox-link.
“The room doesn’t go right along to your archway, but there’s access through.”
Caffran and Criid crawled forward, popping the occasional shot off at the doorway over the broken lecterns and
cracked stools. The floor was soaked with spilled ink and their palms were quickly stained black. Criid saw how
the explosions had blown sprays of ink up the walls of the scriptorium: spattered patterns like reversed-out
starmaps.
Caffran pulled open his hip-case and yanked out a tube-charge.
“Brace for det!” he yelled, ripping the foil strip off the chemical igniter and tossing the metal tube away through
the doorway.
There was a bang that shook the floor and clouds of vapour and debris burst out of the hallway arch. Feygor tried
to move forward to get a look in.
Criid and Caffran had risen and approached the inner doorway. Smoke wreathed the air and there was a pungent
smell of fyceline. Just short of the doorway, Criid unslung her lasrifle and took something out of her pocket. It was
the pin-mount of a brooch or a medal, the surface polished into a mirror. She hooked it over the muzzle of her
weapon and pushed it into the room ahead of her. A turn of the wrist and the mirror slowly revealed the other side of
the doorway.
“Clear,” she said.
They moved in. It was an annex to the scriptorium. Metal presses lined one wall. Three Infardi, killed by
Caffran’s charge, lay near the doorway. They were spattered and drenched by multi-coloured inks and tinctures from
bottles exploded by the blast.
Rawne came in through the hallway arch.
“What’s through there?” he asked, pointing to a small curtained door at the back of the annex.
“Haven’t checked,” Caffran replied.
Rawne went to the door and pushed the curtain aside. A burst of las-fire pelted at him, punching through the cloth.
“Feth!” he cried, taking cover behind a mixing table. He fired through the doorway with his lasrifle and saw an
Infardi crash sideways into a rack of vellum, spilling the whole lot over.
Rawne and Caffran went through the door. It was a parchment store, with no other exits. The Infardi, his green
robes yanked up over his face, was dead.
But there was still shooting.
Rawne turned. It was outside in the corridor.
“We’ve picked up some—” MKillian’s voice spat over the link.
“Feth!” That was Feygor.
Rawne, Criid and Caffran hurried to the corridor archway, but the force of crossfire outside prevented them from
sticking their heads out. Las-shots smacked into the archway’s jamb and ricocheted back into the annex room. One
put a burn across Rawne’s chin.
“Feth!” He snapped back in, smarting, and keyed his microbead. “Feygor! How many!”
“Twenty, maybe twenty-five! Dug in down the hall. Gods, but they’re putting up a wall of fire!”
“Get the cannon onto it!”
“Bragg’s trying! The belt-feed’s jammed! Oh crap—!”
“What? What? Say again?”
Nothing but ferocious las-fire for a second, then Feygor’s voice crackled over the link again. “Bragg’s down.
Took a hit. Feth, we’re pinned!”
Rawne looked around, exasperated. Criid and Caffran were over by the blasted window arches in the main
scriptorium. Criid was peering out.
“What about this?” Caffran called to the major.
Rawne hurried over. Criid was already up and out on the ledge, shuffling along the stone sill.
“You’ve got to be kidding…” Rawne began.
Caffran wasn’t. He was up on the sill too, following Criid. He reached a hand down for Rawne.
The major put his rifle strap over his shoulder and took the hand. Caffran pulled him up onto the stone ledge.
Rawne swore silently. The air was cold. They were high up. The stone flanks of the Universitariat dropped away
ninety metres below the scriptorium window, straight down into the green, opaque channel of the river. Above the
scriptorium’s sloping, tiled roof, domes and spires rose. Rawne swayed for a second.
Criid and Caffran were edging down the ledge, stepping gingerly over leaded rainwater spouts and gutter trays.
Rawne followed them. Bas-relief wall carvings, some in the form of saints or gargoyles, all weathered by age, stuck
out, in some places wider than the ledge. Rawne found they had to go sidelong with their backs to the drop so they
could hunch and belly around such obstructions.
He felt his foot go into nothingness and put his arms round a saint’s stone neck, his heart thundering, his eyes
closed.
When he looked again, he could see Caffran about ten metres away, but there was no sign of the girl Criid. Feth!
Had she fallen off? No. Her bleached-blonde head appeared out of a window further down, urging them on. She was
back inside.
Caffran pulled Rawne in through the broken window. He ripped his kneecaps on the twisted leading and toothy
stubs of glass in the frame and it took him a minute to get his breathing rate down again. He looked around.
A seriously big artillery shell had taken this chamber out. It had come through the windows, blown out the floor
and the floor beneath. The room had a ring of broken floorboards jutting out around the walls and a void in the
centre. They worked their way round on the remains of the floor to the hallway door. The firing was now a way
behind them.
Caffran led the way out into the corridor. The shell blast had blown the room’s wooden door, complete with frame
out across the hall and left it propped upright against the far wall. The three Ghosts scattered back down the hall at a
run, coming in behind the enemy position that was keeping the rest of their team pinned.
The Infardi, twenty-two of them, were dug in behind a series of barricades made from broken furniture They were
blazing away, oblivious to anything behind them.
Rawne and Caffran drew their silver Tanith knives. Criid pulled out her chain-dagger, a gang-marked legacy of
her low-life Vervunhive days. They went into the cultists from behind and eight were finished before the rest became
aware of the counter-attack.
Then it came to hand to hand, a frantic defence. But Rawne and Criid had begun to open fire with their lasguns and
Caffran had pulled out his pistol.
An Infardi with a bayonet charged Rawne screaming, and Rawne blew his legs and belly out, but the momentum of
the charge threw the body into the major and knocked him down.
He tried to scramble out from under the slippery, twitching body. Another Infardi appeared above him, swinging
down with one of those wicked, twist-bladed local axes.
A headshot toppled him.
Rawne got up. The Infardi were dead and his squad was moving up. “Feygor?”
“Nice move, boss,” Feygor replied.
Rawne said nothing. He could see no point in mentioning that the sneak attack had been Caffran’s and Criid’s idea.
“What’s the story?” he asked.
“Waed’s taken a scratch. He’s okay. But Bragg’s got a shoulder wound. We’ll need to vox up a team to stretcher
him out.”
Rawne nodded. “Good headshot,” he added. “That bastard had the drop on me there.”
“Wasn’t me,” said Feygor, jerking a dirty thumb at Banda. The ex-loom girl grinned, patted her lasgun.
And winked.
“Well… Good shooting,” Rawne mumbled.
In a prayer yard east of the Universitariat precinct. Captain Ban Daur was controlling traffic when he heard the
colonel-commissar calling his name.
Colonel Corbec’s second front push had woken up the Old Town, and civilians who had been hiding there in
cellars and basements for the best part of three weeks were now fleeing the quarter en masse.
In the long narrow prayer yard, the tide of filthy, frightened bodies moved west in slow, choked patterns.
“Daur?”
Ban Daur turned and saluted Gaunt.
“There are thousands of them. It’s jamming up the east-west routes. I’ve been trying to redirect them into the
basilica at the end of that street. We’ve got medical teams and aid workers from the city authorities and the
Administratum down there.”
“Good.”
“There’s the problem.” Daur pointed to a row of stationary Hydra battery tractors from the Pardus unit drawn up
against the far side of the yard. “With all these people, they can’t get through.”
Gaunt nodded. He sent Mkoll and a group of Tanith away into a nearby chapel and they returned with pews which
they set up as saw-horses to channel the refugees away.
“Daur?”
“Sir!”
“Get down to this basilica. See if you can’t open up some of the buildings around it.”
“I was taking a squad into the Old Town, sir. Colonel Corbec has asked for more infantry team support in the
commercia.”
Gaunt smiled. Daur meant market district, but he used a term from Vervunhive. “I’m sure he has, but the war will
keep. You’re good with people, Ban. Get this working for me and then you can go get shot at.”
Daur nodded. He respected Gaunt beyond measure, but he wasn’t happy about this order. It seemed all too
characteristic of the jobs he’d found himself doing since joining the Ghosts.
In truth, Daur felt empty and unfulfilled. The fight for Vervunhive had left him hollow and grim, and he’d joined
the Tanith mainly because he couldn’t bear to stay in the shell of the hive he had called home. As a captain, he was
the senior ranking Vervun Primary officer to join the Tanith, and as a result he’d been given a place in the regimental
chain of command on a par with Major Rawne, as officer in charge of the Verghast contingent answering only to
Corbec and Gaunt.
He didn’t like it. Such a role should have gone to a war hero like Kolea or Agun Soric, to one of the men who had
pulled himself up by his bootstraps to earn the respect of the men in the scratch companies. The majority of the
Verghastite men and women who had joined the Ghosts were workers turned warriors, not ex-military. They just
didn’t have the sort of respect for a Vervun Primary captain they had for a hero like Gol Kolea.
But that wasn’t the way it was done in the guard, apparently. So Daur was caught in the middle, with a command
role he didn’t like, giving orders to men who he knew should be his commanders, trying to keep the rivalry between
Tanith and Verghastite under control, trying to win respect.
He wanted to fight. He wanted to badge himself with the sort of glory that would make the troops look up to him.
Instead, he found most of his days spent on squad details, deployment orders, refugee supervision. He could do
that kind of thing well, and Gaunt knew it. So he was always the one Gaunt asked for when such tasks came up. It
was as if Gaunt didn’t think about Ban Daur as a soldier. Just as a facilitator. An administrator. A people person.
Daur snapped out of his reverie as shots rang out and the refugees around him scattered and screamed. Some of
Mkoll’s makeshift saw-horses pitched over in the press. Daur looked around for a sniper, a gunman in the crowd…
One of the gun crew officers on the stationary Pardus vehicles was taking pot-shots with his pistol at the clusters
of votive kites and flags that fluttered over the prayer yard. The flags and banners were secured on long tether-lines
to brass rings along the temple wall. The officer was pinking at them for the entertainment of his crew.
“What the gak are you doing?” Daur shouted as he approached the Hydra mount. The men in their baggy tan
fatigues and slouch caps looked down at him in puzzlement.
“You!” Daur yelled at the officer with the pistol in his hand. “You trying to cause a panic?”
The man shrugged. “Just passing the time Colonel Farris ordered us up to help assault the Citadel Hill, but we’re
not getting anywhere, are we?”
“Get down here,” Daur ordered.
With a glance to his men, the officer bolstered his service pistol and climbed down from the tractor. He was taller
than Daur, with pale, freckled skin and blond hair. Even his eyelashes were blond.
“Name?”
“Sergeant Denil Greer, Pardus Eighth Mobile Flak Company.”
“You got a brain, Greer, or do you get through life with only that sneer?”
“Sir.”
Gaunt approached and Greer lost some of his bluster. His sneer subsided.
“Everything in order, Captain Daur?”
“High spirits, commissar. Everything’s fine.”
Gaunt looked at Greer. “Listen to the captain and be respectful. Better he reprimands you than I do.”
“Sir.”
Gaunt moved away. Daur looked back at Greer. “Get your crews down and help us get these people off the road in
an orderly fashion. You’ll move all the quicker that way.”
Greer saluted halfheartedly and called his men down off the parked vehicles. Mkoll and Daur quickly got them to
work moving civilians off the thoroughfare.
Daur moved through the filthy crowd. No one made eye contact. He’d seen that shocked, war-wrecked, fatigued
look before. He’d worn it himself at Vervunhive.
An old woman, stick-thin and frail, stumbled in the crowd and went over, spilling open a shawl full of
possessions. No one stopped to help. The refugees plodded on around her, stepping over her reaching hands as she
tried to recover her possessions.
Daur helped her up. She was as light as a bag of twigs. Her hair was shockingly white and pinned back against her
skull.
“There,” he said. He stooped and picked up her few belongings: prayer candles, a small icon, some beads, an old
picture of a young man.
He found she was looking at him with eyes filmed by age. None of them had found his eyes out like that.
“Thank you,” she said, her voice richly flavoured with antique Low Gothic. “But I don’t matter. We don’t matter.
Only the saint.”
“What?”
“You’ll protect her, won’t you? I think you will.”
“Come on now, mother, let’s move you along.”
She pressed something into his hand. Daur looked down. It was a small figurine, made of silver, worn almost
featureless.
“I can’t take this, it’s—”
“Protect her. The Emperor would will it of you.”
She wouldn’t take the trinket back, damn her! He almost dropped it. When he looked round again, she had
disappeared into the river of moving bodies.
Daur looked about, confused, searching the moving crowd. He thrust the trinket in his pocket. Nearby, waving
refugees past him, Daur saw Mkoll. He started to ask the scout leader if he’d seen the old woman.
A woman fell against him. A man just ahead dropped to his knees suddenly Nearby in the crowd, someone burst in
a puff of cooked blood.
Daur heard the shooting.
Not even twenty metres away, through the panicking crowd, he saw an Infardi gunman, shooting indiscriminately
with a lasrifle. The killer had dragged back the dirty rags that had been concealing his green silk robes. He’d snuck
in amid the refugee streams like a wolf coming through in the thick of a herd.
Daur drew his laspistol, but he was surrounded by jostling, screaming people. He heard the rifle firing again.
Daur fell over a body on the flagstones. He stumbled, looking through the running legs around him, catching sight
of green silk.
The cultist’s gunfire brought down more of the shrieking people. It made a gap.
Clutching his laspistol two-handed, Daur fired and put three shots through the gunman’s torso; at almost exactly the
same moment, Mkoll put a las-round through his skull from another angle.
The killer twisted and fell down onto the pink stones. Gleaming blood leaked out of him and threaded between the
edges of the flags. There were bodies all around him.
“Sacred soul!” said Mkoll, moving through. Other Tanith troopers ran past, pushing through the crowd and heading
for the north-east end of the yard. The vox-link buzzed and crackled.
More shooting, fierce exchanges, from the direction of the Old Town Road.
Daur and Mkoll pushed against the almost stampeding flow of refugees. At the north-east end of the prayer yard, a
large sandstone pylon led through onto a long colonnade walk between temple rows. Ghosts were grouped in cover
around the pylon, or were daring short runs down into the colonnade to shelter around the bases of black quartzite
stelae spaced at regular intervals.
Gunfire, like a blizzard of tiny comets, churned up and down the colonnade. The long sacred walkway was littered
with the bodies of native Hagians, sprawled out in twisted, undignified heaps.
More Ghosts ran up behind them, and some of the Pardus artillery men too, pistols drawn. Daur glimpsed Sergeant
Greer.
“Go! Go left!” Mkoll yelled across at Daur, and immediately darted along from the arch towards the plinth of the
nearest right-hand stelae. Four of his men gave him covering fire and a couple ran after him. Las-shots stitched
across the walkway’s flags and smacked chippings off the ancient obelisk.
Daur moved left, feeling the heat of a close round across his neck. He almost fell into the shadows of the nearest
obelisk plinth. Other Ghosts tumbled in with him: Lillo, Mkvan and another Tanith whose name he didn’t know. A
Pardus crewman attempted to follow, but he was clipped in the knee and collapsed back into cover yelping.
Daur dared a look out and glimpsed green movement further down the colonnade. The heaviest fire seemed to be
coming from a large building on the left side of the colonnade which Daur believed was a municipal census hall.
“Left two hundred metres,” Daur barked into his link “I see it!” Mkoll replied from the other side of the colonnade.
Daur watched as the scout leader and his fireteam tried to advance. Withering fire drove them back into cover.
Daur ran again, reaching the next obelisk plinth on the left side. Shots were suddenly coming across him from the
right and he turned to see two Infardi straddling the sloping tiles of a building, raking shots down into the shadows of
the street.
Daur fired back, hastily, dragging his lasrifle off his shoulder. Lillo and Nessa reached his position around the
same time and joined his fire. They didn’t hit either of the Infardi but they drove them back off the roof out of sight.
Broken tiles from the section of roof they had bombarded slithered off and crashed down onto the flagstones.
Mkvan reached their position too. The crossfire was intense, but they were a good twenty metres closer to the
census hall than Mkoll’s fireteam.
“This way,” Daur said, making sure he signed the words as he did so. Nessa was an ex-hab worker turned guerilla
and like a fair number of the Verghastite volunteers, she was profoundly deaf from enemy shelling at Vervunhive.
Signed orders were a scratch company basic. She nodded she understood, her fine, elfin features set in a determined
frown as she slid a fresh ammunition cell into the port of her sniper-pattern lasgun.
Running stooped and low, the quartet left the main colonnade and ventured through the airy cool and shadows of a
hypostyle hall. This temple, and the next which they crossed into via a small columned passage, was empty: what
decoration and ornament the faithful hadn’t taken and hidden prior to the invasion had been plundered by the Infardi
during their occupation. Lamp braziers were overturned, and puddles of loose ash dotted the ceramic tiles of the
floor. Splintered wood from broken furniture and prayer mats was scattered around. Along one east-facing wall, in a
pool of sunlight cast by the hypostyle’s high windows, a row of buckets and piles of rags showed where local people
had attempted to scrub the Infardi’s heathen blasphemies off the temple walls.
The four of them moved in pairs, providing bounding cover, two stationary and aiming while the other two swept
forward to the next contact point.
The back of the second temple led into a subsidiary precinct that connected to the census hall. Here, the walls
were faced in black grandiorite, but some Infardi hand had taken a sledgehammer to the ancient wall-carvings.
The Infardi had posted lookouts at the back of the census hall. Mkvan spotted them, and brought the Ghosts into
cover as laser and solid shots cut into the arched doorway of the precinct and blew dusty holes in the ashlar.
Nessa settled and aimed. She had a good angle and two single shots brought down a couple of the enemy gunmen.
Daur smiled. The vaunted Tanith snipers like “Mad” Larkin and Rilke would have to guard their reputations against
some of the Verghastite girls.
Daur and Mkvan ran forward through the archway, back into the bright sunlight, and tossed tube-charges in through
the rear doors of the census hall. A row of small glass windows overlooking the alley blew out simultaneously and
smoke and dust rolled back out of the doors.
The four Ghosts went in, knives fixed as bayonets, firing short bursts into the smoke. They came into the Infardi
position from behind. The intense firefight began to split the airy interior of the census hall.
Daur’s strike immediately diluted the Infardi barrage from the front of the building, allowing the pinned forces in the
colonnade ample chance to push in. Three fireteams of Ghosts, including Mkoll’s, circled in down the colonnade.
By then, Gaunt had moved up to the front line amongst the stelae. “Mkoll?”
“The front’s barricaded firmly, sir,” the scout leader reported over the link. “We’ve got their attention turned away
from us… I think that’s Daur’s doing.”
Gaunt crouched behind a stelae and waved a signal down the line of crouching Ghosts ranged along the side of the
colonnade. Trooper Brostin ran forward, the tanks of his flamer unit clanking.
“What kept you?” Gaunt asked.
“Probably all the shooting,” Brostin replied flippantly. The colonel-commissar indicated the census hall facade.
“Wash it out, please.”
Brostin, a big man with ursine shoulders and a ragged, bushy moustache, who always reeked of promethium,
hefted the flamer around and thumbed the firing toggle The tanks made a coughing gurgle and then retched a spear of
liquid fire out at the census hall. The jet of flame arced downwards with yellow tongues and noxious black smoke
curling off it like a mane.
Fire drizzled and trickled across the boarded front of the hall. Painted panels suddenly scorched black and caught
fire. Paint peeled and beaded in the heat. The tie-beams over the door burst into flames.
Brostin took a few steps forward and squirted flame directly in through some of the tight firing slits in the hall’s
defences. Gaunt liked watching Brostin work. The burly trooper had an affinity with fire, an understanding of the
way it ran and danced and leapt. He could make it work for him; he knew what would combust quickly and what
slowly, what would burst in fierce incandescent flames and what would smoulder; he knew how to use wind and
breeze to fan flames up into target dugouts. Brostin wasn’t just hosing an enemy emplacement with flames here he
was artfully building an inferno.
According to Sergeant Varl, Brostin’s skill with fire came from his background as a firewatcher in Tanith Magna.
Gaunt could believe this. It wasn’t what Trooper Larkin said, though. Larkin said Brostin was an ex-convict with a
ten-year sentence for arson.
The fire, almost white, coiled up the hall front and caught the roof. A significant section of the front wall blew out
into the street as fire touched off something volatile, perhaps an Infardi’s satchel of grenades. Another section
guttered and fell in. Three green-dad men came out of the hall door mouth, firing las-weapons down the colonnade.
The robes of one of the trio were burning. Ghost weapons opened up all around and the three toppled.
A couple of grenades flew from the burning hall and exploded in the middle of the street. Then two more Infardi
tried to break out. Mkoll killed both within seconds of them appearing at the doorway.
Now, under Gaunt’s orders, the Ghosts were firing into the burning facade. A Pardus Hydra platform clanked
down the centre of the colonnade, trailing a bunch of prayer-kite tails that had snagged on its barrels and aerial
mount and rolled in beside Gaunt’s position.
Gaunt climbed up onto the plate behind the gunner and supervised as the NCO swung the four long snouts of the
anti-aircraft autocannons down to horizontal.
“Target practice,” Gaunt told him.
The gunner tipped a salute and then tore the front of the census hall into burning scraps with his unforgiving
firepower.
Inside, at the rear of the hall, Daur and his comrades were moving back the way they had come in. Thick black
smoke boiled out from the main body of the hall. Daur, choking, could smell promethium and knew a flamer had been
put to good work. Now there was a hell of a noise out front. Heavy fire, and not something man-portable.
“Come on!” he rasped, waving Nessa, Lillo and Mkvan back. The four staggered through the smoke wash,
coughing and spitting, half blind. Daur prayed they hadn’t lost their sense of direction.
They were remarkably unscathed. Mkvan had a scratch across the back of his hand and Lillo was cut along the
forehead, but they’d hit the Infardi hard and lived to tell of it.
More heavy firing from the colonnade side. A couple of murderously powerful shots, glowing tracers, tore through
a wall behind them and passed over their heads. The shots had passed right through the bulk of the census hall.
“Gak!” cried Lillo. “Was that a tank?”
Daur was about to reply when Nessa gave out a gasping cry and doubled over. He swung around, eyes stinging
with the smoke and saw five Infardi rushing them from the main hall area. Two were firing lasrifles. Another’s robes
had all been burnt off his seared body.
Daur fired, and felt the kiss of a las-round past his shoulder. Daur’s gunfire blew two of the Infardi over onto their
backs. Another charged Mkvan and was impaled on the Tanith’s out-thrust bayonet. Thrashing, fixed, the Infardi shot
Mkvan through the face point-blank with his pistol. Both bodies toppled over in the smoke.
Lillo was borne down by the other two who, weaponless, clawed at him and ripped into his clothes and skin with
dirty, hooked fingernails. One got his hands on Lillo’s lasrifle and was trying to pull it free, though the sling was
hooked. Daur threw himself at the rebel and they went over, crashing back through the doorway and into the fireswamped
main hall.
The heat took Daur’s breath away. The Infardi was hitting and biting and clawing. They rolled through fire. The
enemy had his hands around Daur’s throat now. Daur thought about his knife, but remembered it was still attached to
the bayonet lug of his lasrifle, and that was lying out in the next room next to Mkvan’s corpse.
Daur rolled, allowing the frantic Infardi to get on top of him, and then bucked and reeled, kicking up with his legs,
throwing the cultist headfirst over the top of him. The cultist bounced off a burning table as he landed, throwing up a
cloud of sparks. He got up, muttering some obscene oath, a smouldering chair leg in his hands, ready to wield as a
club.
The roof came in. A five tonne beam, rippling from end to end with a thick plumage of yellow and orange flame,
crushed the Infardi into the ground.
Daur scrambled up. His tunic was on fire. Little blue flames licked down the sleeve and the cuff, and around the
seams of the pockets. He beat at himself, stumbling towards the door. He hadn’t taken a breath in what seemed like
two or three minutes. His lungs were full of searing heat.
In the annex at the back of the census hall, Lillo was trying to drag Nessa out through the back portico. Tarry black
smoke was gusting out of the rafters and the air was almost unbearably toxic.
Daur stumbled towards them, over the burning bodies of the Infardi. He helped Lillo manhandle Nessa’s dead
weight.
She’d been shot in the stomach. It looked bad, but Daur was no medic. He had no idea how bad.
A dull rumble echoed through the blazing hall as another roof section collapsed, and a gust of smoke, sparks and
superheated air bellowed out around them. As they staggered through the portico into the rear yard, Daur heard
something fall from his tunic and clink on the ground behind him.
The trinket. The old woman’s trinket.
They dragged Nessa clear across the yard and Lillo collapsed by her side, coughing from the bottom of his lungs
and trying to vox for a med-team.
Daur crossed back to the flaming portico, tearing off his smouldering tunic. The heat and flames had scorched the
fabric and burst the seams. One of the pockets was hanging off by singed threads and it was from there that the silver
trinket had fallen.
Daur saw it on the flagstones, lying just inside the portico. He hunkered down under the seething mass of black
smoke that filled the upper half of the archway and roiled up into the windy blue sky. He reached for it and closed
his fingers around the trinket. It was painfully hot from the blaze.
Something bumped into him and knocked him to his knees. He turned to face an Infardi cultist, his flesh baked raw
and bloody, who had come blindly out of the inferno.
He reached out his blistered hands, clawing at Daur, and Daur snapped his laspistol from its holster and put two
rounds through his heart.
Then Daur fell over.
Lillo ran across to him, but Daur couldn’t hear what the trooper was shouting.
He looked down. The engraved hilt of the ritual dagger was sticking out of his ribcage and blood as dark and rich
as berry juice was pumping out around it. The Infardi hadn’t just bumped into him at all.
Daur started to laugh inanely, but blood filled his throat. He stared at the Infardi weapon until his vision became
like a tunnel and then faded out altogether.
THREE
PATER SIN
“Fortune deliver you by the nine holy wounds!”
—ayatani blessing
His father turned from the workbench, put down a greasy spanner and smiled at him as he wiped his oily hands on a
rag. The machine shop smelled of cog-oil, promethium and cold metal.
He held out the piping hot cup of caffeine, a cup so big his small hands clutched it like a chalice, and his father
took it gratefully. It was dawn, and the autumn sun was gliding up over the stands of massive nalwood trees beyond
the lane that led down from the river road to his father’s machine shop.
The men had arrived at dusk the previous night, eight raw-palmed men from the timber reserve fifteen leagues
down river. They had a big order to meet for a cabinet maker in Tanith Magna and their main woodsaw had thrown
its bearings. A real emergency… could the best mechanic in Pryze County help them out?
The men from the reserve had brought the saw up on a flatbed wagon, and they helped his father roll it back into
the workshop. His father had sent him to light all the lamps. It was going to be a late hour before work would be
finished.
He waited in the doorway of the shop as his father made a last few adjustments to the woodsaw’s big motor and
then screwed the grille cover back in place. Collected sawdust had spilled out of the recesses of the cover and the
room was suddenly perfumed with the pungent fragrance of nalwood.
As he waited for his father to test the saw, he felt his heart beating fast. It had been the same as long as he could
remember, the excitement of watching his father perform magic, of watching his father take dead lumps of metal and
put them together and make them live. It was a magic he hoped he’d inherit one day, so that he could take over when
his father had done with working. So that he’d be the machinesmith.
His heart was beating so fast now, it hurt. His chest hurt. He clutched the doorframe to steady himself.
His father threw the switch on the sawblock and the machine shrilled into life. Its rasping shriek rattled around the
shop.
The pain in his chest was quite real now. He gasped. It was all down one side, down the left, across his ribs. He
tried to call out to his father, but his voice was too weak and the noise of the running saw too loud.
He was going to die, he realised. He was going to die there in the doorway of his father’s machine shop in Pryze
County with the smell of nalwood in his nose and the sound of a woodsaw in his ears and a great big spike of
impossible pain driving into his heart—
Colm Corbec opened his eyes and added a good thirty-five years to his life. He wasn’t a boy anymore. He was an
old soldier with a bad wound in a grim, grim situation.
He’d been stripped to the waist, with the filthy remnants of his undershirt still looped about his shoulders. He’d
lost a boot. Where the feth his equipment and vox-link had gone was anybody’s guess.
Blood, scratches and bruises covered his flesh. He tried to move and pain felled him back. The left side of his
ribcage was a mass of purple tissue swelling around a long laser burn.
“D-don’t move, chief,” a voice said.
Corbec looked around and saw Yael beside him. The young Tanith trooper was ash-white and sat with his back
against a crumbling brick wall. He too had been stripped down to his breeches and dried blood caked his shoulders.
Corbec looked around. They were sprawled together in the old, dead fireplace of a grand room that the war had
brutally visited. The walls were shattered skins of plaster that showed traces of old decorations and painting, and the
once-elegant windows were boarded. Light stabbed in through slits between the planks. The last thing Corbec
remembered was storming into the guild hall. This, as far as he could tell, wasn’t the guild hall at all.
“Where are we? What h—”
Yael shook his head gently and gripped Corbec’s arm tightly.
Corbec shut up fast as he followed Yael’s look and saw the Infardi. There were dozens of them, scurrying into the
room through a doorway out of sight to his left. Some took up positions at the windows, weapons ready. Others
moved in, carrying ammo crates and bundles of equipment. Four were manhandling a long and obviously heavy
bench into the room. The feet of the bench scraped on the stone floor. The Infardi spoke to each other in dull, low
voices.
Now he began to remember. He remembered the four of them taking the main chamber of the guild hall. God
Emperor, but they’d punished those cultist scum! Kolea had fought like a daemon, Leyr and Yael at his side. Corbec
remembered pressing ahead with Yael, calling to Kolea to cover them. And then—
And then pain. A las-shot from almost point-blank range from an Infardi playing dead in the rubble.
Corbec pulled himself up beside Yael, wincing at the pain.
“Let me look,” he whispered, and tried to see to the young man’s injury. Yael was shaking slightly, and Corbec
noticed that one of the boy’s pupils was more dilated than the other.
He saw the back of Yael’s head and froze. How was the boy still alive?
“Kolea? Leyr?”
“I think they got out. I didn’t see…” Yael whispered back. He was about to say something else, but he fell
suddenly dumb as a sigh wafted through the room.
Corbec felt it rather than heard it. The Infardi gunmen had gone quiet and were backing to the edges of the chamber
beyond the fireplace, heads bowed.
Something came into the room, something the shape, perhaps, of a large man, if a man can be clothed in a whisper.
It was something like a large, upright patch of heat haze, fogging and distorting the air, humming like the low throb of
a drowsy hornet’s nest.
Corbec stared at the shape. He could smell the way it blistered reality around itself, smell that cold hard scent of
the warp. The shape was simultaneously translucent and solid: vapour-frail but as hard as Imperator armour. The
more Corbec looked, the more he saw in the haze. Tiny shapes, twinkling, seething, moving and humming like a
billion insects.
With another sigh, the refractor shield disengaged and dissolved, revealing a large figure wrapped in green silk
robes. The compact generator pack for the body-shield swung from a belt harness.
It turned to face the two guard prisoners in the empty fireplace.
Well over two metres, built of corded muscle, with skin, where it showed past the rich emerald silk, decorated
with the filthy tattoos of the Infardi cult.
Pater Sin smiled down at Colm Corbec.
“You know who I am?”
“I can guess.”
Sin nodded and his grin broadened. An image of the Emperor tortured and agonised was tattooed across his left
cheek and forehead, with Sin’s bloodshot left eye forming the screaming mouth. Sin’s teeth were sharpened steel
implants. He smelled of sweat and cinnamon and decay. He hunched down in front of Corbec. Corbec could feel
Yael quaking with fear beside him.
“We are alike, you and I.”
“I don’t think so…” said Corbec.
“Oh yes. You are a son of the Emperor, sworn to his service. I am Infardi… a pilgrim devoted to the cults of his
saints. Saint Sabbat, bless her bones. I come here to do homage to her.”
“You come here to desecrate, you vile bastard.”
The steel grin remained even as Sin lashed out and kicked Corbec in the ribs.
He blacked out. When his mind swam back, he was crumpled in the centre of the room with Infardi all around him.
They were chanting and beating time on their legs or the stocks of their rifles. He couldn’t see Yael. The pain in his
ribs was overwhelming.
Pater Sin reappeared. Behind him was the bench his minions had dragged in. It was a workbench, Corbec now
saw. A stonecutter’s bench with a big rock drill damped to it. The drill whined. The noise had been in Corbec’s
dream.
He had thought it was a woodsaw.
“Nine holy wounds the saint suffered,” Sin was saying. “Let us celebrate them again, one by one.”
His men threw Yael on the bench. The drill sang.
There was nothing Corbec could do.
To the north of its area, the Old Town rose steeply, dinging to the lower scarps of the Citadel plateau. A main
thoroughfare called, confusingly enough, Infardi Mile, curved up from the Place of Wells and the livestock markets
and climbed through a more salubrious commercial neighbourhood, the Stonecutters Quarter.
One glimpse of the temples, the stelae, the colonnades — any of the Doctrinopolis’ triumphant architecture — told
a visitor how exalted the work of the stonecutters and the masonic guilds was. The most massive work, the great
sarsens and grandiorite blocks, were brought in by river or canal from the vast upland quarries, but in their
workshop houses on the skirts of the Citadel mount, the stonecutters carved their intricate statuary, gargoyles, ceiling
bosses, cross-facings and lintels.
At the bottom end of Infardi Mile, the Tanith chief medic Tolin Dorden had set up a field aid-post in a ceramictiled
public washhouse. Some of the men had carried in buckets or helmets full of water from the fountain pools in
the square to sluice the washrooms out. Dorden had personally taken a disinfectant rub to the worktops where the
clothes had been scrubbed. There was a damp, stale scent to the place, undercut by the warm, linty aroma that drifted
from the drying cupboards over the heating vents.
He was just finishing sewing up a gash on Trooper Gutes’ thumb when a Verghastite Ghost wandered in from the
harsh sunlight in the square. The raiding thump of Pardus mortars shelling the Citadel rolled in the distance. Out in
the square, Dorden could see huddles of Tanith resting by the fountains.
He sent Gutes on his way.
“What’s the trouble?” he asked the newcomer, a broad-faced, heavy jawed man in his thirties.
“It’s me arm, doc,” he replied, his voice full of the Verghastite vowel-sounds.
“Trooper Tyne,” the man replied, dragging up his sleeve. The upper part of his left arm was a bloody, weeping
mess, with infection setting in.
Dorden reached for a swab to start cleaning.
“This is infected. You should have brought it to me before now. What is it, a shrapnel wound?”
Tyne shook his head, wincing at the touches of the alcohol-soaked swab. “Not really.”
Dorden cleaned a little more blood away and saw the dark green lines and the knife marks. Realising what it was,
he cleaned a little more.
“Didn’t the commissar issue a standing order about tattoos?”
“He said we could mark ’em if we knew how to do it.”
“Which you clearly don’t. There’s a man in eleven platoon, one of yours, what’s his name… Trooper Cuu? They
say he does a good job.”
“Cuu’s a gak-head. I couldn’t afford him.”
“So you did it yourself?”
“Mm.”
Dorden washed the wound as best he could and gave the trooper a shot. The Tanith were, to a man, tattooed.
Mostly these were ritual or family marks. It was part of the culture. Dorden had one himself. But the only Verghastite
volunteers with tattoos were gangers and slum-habbers wearing their allegiances and clan-marks. Now almost all of
them wanted a mark — an axe-rake, a Tanith symbol, an Imperial aquila.
If you didn’t have a mark, the sentiment went you weren’t no Ghost.
This was the seventeenth infected home-made mark Dorden had treated. He’d have to speak to Gaunt.
Someone was shouting out in the square. Trooper Gutes ran back in. “Doc! Doc!”
Outside, everyone was on their feet. A group of Tanith Ghosts had appeared from the direction of the fighting
down in the merchant market, carrying Trooper Leyr on a makeshift stretcher. Gol Kolea was running beside the
prostrate man.
There was shouting and confusion. Calmly, Dorden pushed his way through the mob and got the stretcher down on
the ground so he could look.
“What happened?” he asked Kolea, as he started to dress the las-wound in Leyr’s thigh. The man was hurt,
battered, covered in minor wounds and semi-conscious, but he wouldn’t die.
“We lost the colonel,” Kolea said simply.
Dorden stopped his work abruptly and looked up at the big Verghastite. The men all around went quiet.
“You what?”
“Corbec took me and Yael and Leyr in under the guild hall. We were doing pretty well but there were too many. I
got out with Leyr here, but Colonel Corbec and the lad… They got them. Alive. As we shot our way out of the hall,
Leyr saw the bastards dragging both of them away.”
There was murmuring all around.
“I had to get Leyr to an aid-station. That’s done. I’m going back for Corbec now. Corbec and Yael. I want
volunteers.”
“You’ll never find them!” said Trooper Domor, stunned and miserable.
“The bastards were taking them north. Into the high part of the Old Town, towards the Capital. They’re holding
positions up there. My guess is they’re going to interrogate them. Means they’ll be alive for a while yet.”
Dorden shook his head. He didn’t agree with the brave Verghastite’s assessment. But then he’d seen a great deal
more of the way Chaos worked.
“Volunteers! Come on!” Kolea snapped. Hands went up all around. Kolea selected eight men and turned.
“Wait!” said Dorden. He moved forward and checked the minor wounds on Kolea’s face and chest. “You’ll live.
Let’s go—”
“You’re coming?”
Corbec was pretty much beloved by all, but he and the old doctor had a special bond. Dorden nodded. He turned
to Trooper Rafflan, the vox-operator. “Signal the commissar. Tell him what we’re doing and where we’re going. Tell
him to get a medic down here to man the aid-post and an officer to supervise.”
Dorden gathered up a makeshift kit and hurried after the troopers moving out of the square.
“You’re behind schedule, Gaunt,” said the clipped voice from the vox speaker. The lips of Lord General Lugo’s
three-dimensional holographic image moved out of sync with his utterance. Lugo was speaking via vox-pictor from
Imperial Base Command at Ansipar City, six hundred and forty kilometres south-west of the Doctrinopolis, and
atmospherics were causing a communications lag.
“Noted, sir. But with respect, we’re inside the Holy City four days ahead of your pre-assault strategy prediction.”
Gaunt and the other officers present in the gloomy command tractor waited while the lag coped with the reply.
Seated in harness restraints to the rear, astropaths mumbled and muttered. The hologram flickered and jumped, and
then Lugo spoke again.
“Quite so. I have already applauded the work done by Colonel Furst’s Pardus units in breaking you in.”
“The Pardus have done excellent work,” Gaunt agreed smoothly. “But the colonel himself will tell you the Infardi
put up little outer resistance. They didn’t want to meet our armour head on. They fell back into the Doctrinopolis
where the density of the buildings would work to their advantage. It’s going street by street with the infantry now,
and by necessity, it’s slow.”
“Two days!” the vox crackled. “That was the estimate. Once you’d entered the walls of the Holy City, you said
you’d need two days to retake and consolidate. Yet you’re not even near the Citadel!”
Gaunt sighed. He glanced around at his fellow officers: Major Kleopas, the squat, plump, ageing second-incommand
of the Pardus armour; Captain Herodas, the Pardus’ infantry liaison officer; Major Szabo of the Brevian
Centennials. None of them looked comfortable.
“We’re shelling the Citadel with mortars,” Szabo began, his hands in the patch-pockets of his mustard drab jacket.
Herodas cut in. “That’s true. We’re getting medium firepower close to the Citadel. The heavies will pull in once
the infantry have cleared the streets. Commissar Gaunt’s representation of the theatre is accurate. Getting into the city
proved to be four days easier than you estimated. Getting through it is proving harder.”
Gaunt shot the young Pardus captain an appreciative nod. A calm, united front was the only way to deal with
tactically obsessed top brass-hole like Lugo.
The holographic figure jerked and fizzled again. A phantom of green light and mist, Lord General Lugo stared out
at them. “Let me tell you now that we are all but done here at Ansipar. The city is burning and the shrines are ours.
My troops are rounding up the enemy stragglers for execution as we speak. Furthermore, Colonel Cerno reports his
forces are within a day of taking Hylophan. Colonel Paquin raised the aquila above the royal palace at Hetshapsulis
yesterday. Only the Doctrinopolis remains in enemy hands. I gave you the job of taking it because of your reputation,
Gaunt. Was I wrong?”
“It will be taken, lord general. Your faith was not misplaced.” A lag-pause. “When?”
“I hope to begin full assault on the Capital by sundown. I will advise you of our progress.”
“I see. Very well. The Emperor protects.” The four officers repeated the abjuration in a mumbled chorus as the
hologram fizzled out. “Damn him,” Gaunt murmured.
“He’s there to be damned,” Major Kleopas agreed. He pulled down one of the metal frame slouch-seats from the
wall of the tractor hull, sat his rotund bulk down and scratched at the scar tissue around the augmetic implant that
served as his left eye. Herodas went to fetch them all caffeine from the stove rack by the rear hatch.
Gaunt took off his peaked and braided cap, set it on the edge of the chart display and tossed his leather gloves into
it. He knew well what Kleopas meant. Lugo was new blood, one of the “New Minted” generals Warmaster Macaroth
had brought with him when he superseded Slaydo and took command of the Sabbat Worlds Crusade almost six
sidereal years before. Some, like the great Urienz, had proved themselves just as able as the Slaydo favourites they
replaced. Others had proved only that they were book-learned tacticians with years of campaign in the war-libraries
of Terra and none at the front line. Lord General Lugo was desperate to prove himself, Gaunt knew. He’d botched
command of his first theatre, Oscillia IX, turning a sure-thing into a twenty-month debacle, and there were rumours
that an enquiry was pending following his lightning raids on the hives of Karkariad. He needed a win, and a victor’s
medal on his chest, and he needed them quickly before Macaroth decided he was dead weight.
The liberation of Hagia was to have been given to Lord Militant General Bulledin, which was why Gaunt had
gladly approved his Ghosts for the action. But at the last minute, presumably after much petitioning behind the scenes
by Lugo’s faithful, Macaroth had replaced Bulledin and put Lugo in charge. Hagia was meant to be an easy win and
Lugo wanted it.
“What do we do?” asked Szabo as he took a cup from Herodas.
“We do as we’re told,” Gaunt replied. “We take the Citadel. I’ll pull my men back out of Old Town and the Pardus
can shell it to pieces. Clear us a path. Then we’ll storm the Citadel.”
“That’s not how you want it to go, is it?” asked Kleopas. “There are still civilians in that district.”
“There may be,” Gaunt conceded, “but you heard the lord general. He wants the Doctrinopolis taken in the next
few days and he’ll make us scapegoats for any delay. War is war, gentlemen.”
“I’ll make arrangements,” said Kleopas grimly. “Pardus armour will be rolling through Old Town before the
afternoon is old.”
There was a metallic rap at the outer hatch. A Tanith trooper on duty opened it and spoke to the figure outside as
cool daylight streamed into the dim tactical chamber.
“Sir?” the trooper called to Gaunt.
Gaunt walked to the hatch and climbed down out of the massive armoured mobile command centre. The tractor, a
barn-sized hull of armoured metal on four massive track sections, had been parked in a narrow street beside the
basilica where the city’s refugees were now being housed. Gaunt could see rivers of them still issuing from the Old
Town district, pouring into the massive building under the supervision of Ghost troopers.
Milo was waiting for him, accompanied by a local girl in cream robes and a quartet of old, distinguished men in
long gowns of austere blue silk.
“You asked for me?” Gaunt said to Milo.
The young Tanith nodded. “This is ayatani Kilosh, ayatani Gugai, ayatani Hilias and ayatani Winid,” he said,
indicating the men.
“Ayatani?” Gaunt asked.
“Local priests, sir. Devotees of the saint. You asked me to find out about—”
“I remember now. Thank you, Milo. Gentlemen. My trooper here has undoubtedly explained the sad news I bear.
For the loss of Infareem Infardus, you have my commiserations.”
“They are accepted with thanks, warrior,” ayatani Kilosh replied. He was a tall man, bald save for a silver
goatee. His eyes were immeasurably weary.
“I am Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt, commander of the Tanith First and over-all commander of the action here
at the Doctrinopolis. It is my wish that your high king, so miserably murdered by the arch-enemy, should receive
every honour that is due to him.”
“The boy has explained as much,” said Kilosh. Gaunt saw how Milo winced at the word “boy”. “We appreciate
your efforts and your respect for our customs.”
“Hagia is a holy world, father. The honour of Saint Sabbat is one of the primary reasons for our crusade To retake
her home-world is my chief concern. By honouring your customs, I do no more than honour the God-Emperor of
Mankind himself.”
“The Emperor protects,” the four priests echoed in concert.
“So what must be done?”
“Our king must be laid to rest in sanctified soil,” said Gugai. “And what counts as sanctified?”
“There are a number of places. The Shrinehold of the Saint is the most holy, but here in the Doctrinopolis, the
Citadel is the high hallowed ground.”
Gaunt listened to Kilosh’s words and turned to look out past the jagged roofs of the Old Town towards the
towering plateau of the inner Citadel. It was swathed in smoke, the white after-fog of heavy mortar shelling wisping
away into the windy blue air.
“We have just drawn plans to retake the Citadel, fathers. It is our imperative As soon as the way is clear, I will
allow you through to perform your rites and lay your gracious ruler to rest.”
The ayatani nodded as one.
There, thought Gaunt. It’s decided for me. Hell take Lugo’s wishes, we have a need to recapture the Citadel now.
Kloepas, Herodas and Szabo had emerged from the command tractor now and Gaunt waved them over. He signalled
to his waiting vox-officer too.
“We’re go for the Citadel,” Gaunt told the officers. “Get the armour ready. I want shelling to begin in an hour from
now. Beltayn?”
The Tanith vox-officer stepped up. “Signal the Tanith units in the Old Town area to withdraw. The word is given.
Armour assault begins in an hour.”
Trooper Beltayn nodded and hitched his vox-set around to his hip, coding in the orders for transmission.
“That one’s your leader?” Sanian asked Milo as they waited in the shadow of the command tractor. “That’s him.”
She studied Gaunt thoughtfully. “It is his way,” she said.
“What?”
“His way. It is his way and it suits him. Do you not have a way, Trooper Milo?”
“I… I don’t know what you mean…”
“By ‘Way’, the esholi means destined path, boy,” said ayatani Gugai, looming at Milo’s left side. Sanian bowed
her head in respect. Milo turned to the old priest.
Gugai was by far the most ancient of the four priests Sanian had found for him. His skin was wizened and deeply
scored with innumerable lines. His eyes were clouding and dim, and his body, beneath the blue silk robes, was
twisted and hunched from a lifetime that had been both long and hard.
“I’m sorry, father… with respect, I still don’t understand.”
Gugai looked cross at Milo’s reply. He glanced at the bowed Sanian. “Explain it to the off-worlder, esholi.”
Sanian looked up at Milo and the old priest. Milo was struck by the peerless clarity of her eyes.
“We of Hagia believe that every man and woman born in the influence of the Emperor—” she began.
“Fate preserve him, may the nine wounds mark his fortune,” intoned Gugai.
Sanian bowed again. “We believe that everyone has a way. A destiny preordained for them. A path to follow.
Some are born to be leaders, some to be kings, some to be cattlemen, some to be paupers.”
“I… see…” Milo said.
“You don’t at all!” Gugai said with contempt. “It is our belief, given to us by the saint herself, that everyone has a
destiny. Sooner or later, God-Emperor willing, that destiny will realise itself and our way become set. My way was
to become a member of the ayatani. Commander Gaunt’s way, and it is clear, is to be a warrior and a leader of
warriors.”
“That is why we esholi study all disciplines and schools of learning,” Sanian said. “So that when our way
becomes apparent to us, we are ready, no matter what it brings.”
Milo began to understand. “So you have yet to find your… way?” he asked Sanian. “Yes. I am esholi yet.”
Gugai sat his old bones down on an empty ammo box and sighed. “Saint Sabbat was a low-born, daughter of a
chelon herdsman in the high pastures of what we now call the Sacred Hills. But she rose, you see, she rose despite
her background, and led the citizens of the Imperium to conquest and redemption.”
The best part of six years in the Sabbat Worlds Crusade had told Milo that much. Saint Sabbat had, six thousand
years before, come from poverty on this colony world to command Imperial forces and achieve victory throughout
the cluster, driving the forces of evil out.
He had seen images of her, bare-headed and tonsured, dressed in Imperator armour, decapitating the daemons of
filth with her luminous sword.
Milo realised the girl and the old priest were staring at him.
“I have no idea of my way,” he said quickly. “I’m a survivor, a musician… and a warrior, or that’s what I hope to
be.” Gugai stared some more and then shook his head. It was the strangest thing. “No, not a warrior. Not simply a
warrior. Something else.”
“What do you mean?” asked Milo, disarmed.
“Your way is many years hence…” Gugai began, then stopped abruptly.
“You’ll find it. When the time comes.” The old priest rose stiffly and wandered away to rejoin his three brethren,
talking together quietly in the stepped portico of the basilica.
“What the feth was that about?” Milo barked, turning to the girl.
“Ayatani Gugai is one of the Doctrinopolis elders, a holy man!” she exclaimed defensively.
“He’s an old madman! What did he mean I wasn’t a warrior? Was that some kind of prophecy?” Sanian looked at
Milo as if he’d just asked the dumbest question in the entire Imperium.
“Of course it was,” she said.
Milo was about to reply when his earpiece squawked and combat traffic crackled into his link. He listened for a
moment and then his face went dark.
“Stay here,” he told the girl student. He hurried towards Gaunt who stood with the other Imperial officers at the
rear steps of the command tractor. Sunlight barred down between the high roofs of the temple district and made pools
on the otherwise dark street. Rat-birds, their plumage grey and dirty, fluttered between the eaves or roosted and
gurgled in the gutters.
As Milo strode towards Gaunt he could see that the Tanith commander was listening to his own headset. “You
heard that, sir?” Gaunt nodded.
“They’ve got Colonel Corbec. Kolea’s leading a rescue party.”
“I heard.”
“So call off the withdrawal. Call off the armour.”
“As you were, trooper.”
“What?”
“I said — As you were!”
“But—” Milo began and then shut up. He could see the dark, terrible look in Gaunt’s face.
“Milo… if there was a chance of saving Corbec, I’d hold up the entire fething crusade. But if he’s been taken by
the Infardi, he’s already dead. The lord general wants this place taken quickly. I can’t suspend an attack in the slim
hope of seeing Colm again. Kolea and his team must pull out with the others. We’ll take the Citadel by nightfall.”
There were many things Brin Milo wanted to say. Most of them were about Colm Corbec. But the look of Colonel-
Commissar Gaunt’s face denied them all.
“Corbec’s dead. That’s the way of war. Let’s win this in his name.”
“Signal him ‘no’,” Kolea drawled.
“Sir?” vox-officer Rafflan queried.
“Signal him a ‘no’, gak take you! We’re not withdrawing!” Rafflan sat down in a corner of the ruined Old Town
dwelling they had secured. Trooper Domor and four others moved past to the cracked and bare windows and aimed
their lasguns. The old doctor, Dorden, weighed down with his medicae kit and loose-fitting black smock, was last
into the building.
“I can’t, sir, with respect,” said Rafflan. “The colonel’s signalled a priority order, code Falchion, verified. We are
to withdraw from the Old Town now. Shelling is to commence in forty-six minutes.”
“No!” Kolea snapped. The men looked round from their positions.
Dorden settled in beside Kolea on the slope of plaster and rubble under the window.
“Gol… I don’t like this any more than you, but Gaunt’s made an order.”
“You never break one?”
“An order from Gaunt? You’re kidding!”
“Not even on Nacedon, when he ordered you to abandon that field hospital?”
“Feth! Who’s been talking?”
Kolea paused for a moment. “Corbec told me,” he said.
Dorden looked down and ran a hand through his thinning grey hair. “Corbec, huh? Damn it…”
“If they start shelling, we’ll be hit by our own guns,” Trooper Wheln said.
“It’s Corbec,” Dorden said simply.
“Don’t signal,” said Kolea, reaching forward and unplugging Rafflan’s headset. “Just don’t signal, if it makes you
feel better. We’ve got to do this. You just never got the order.”
Mkvenner and Sergeant Haller called back that the street was clean. They were on the edge of the Stonecutters’
district.
“Well?” Dorden looked at Kolea.
“Come on!” he replied.
Two hours after the midday chimes had peeled from the dozen or more clock towers in the Universitariat district, to
be echoed by the clocks of the Old Town and beyond, the Pardus armour was unleashed.
Led by Colonel Furst aboard the legendary Shadow Sword super-heavy tank Castigatus, a storm-shoal of fifty
Leman Russ Conquerors, thirty-eight Thunderer siege tanks and ten Stygies-pattern Vanquishers slammed into the
southern lip of the Old Town.
Long-range bombardment from Basilisk units and Earth-shaker platforms out in the marshes south of the city
perimeter fell for twenty minutes until the tank squadrons were poised at the limits of the Old Town district. By then,
firestorms were boiling through the street blocks from the livestock market north to Haemod Palisade and all the way
across to Infardi Mile.
The tank groups plunged forward, their main weapons blasting as they went. Vanquishers and Conquerors
followed the street routes, churning up the Mile like determined beetles under a rising pall of smoke and firedust that
quickly shrouded the entire city. The hefty siege tanks ploughed straight through terraced habitation blocks and
ancient dwelling towers with their dozer blades, bricks and building stone and tiles cascading off them. The thump
and roar of the tank guns quickly became a dram beat heard by all of the citizens and soldiery in the Doctrinopolis.
The Ghosts had fallen back into the suburbs south of the Old Town, and the Brevians had withdrawn clear of the
firefield to the Northern Quarter above the Universitariat. Vox-officers reported to the tactical teams that Sergeant
Kolea’s team had not been recorded.
The fire splash of the tank wave rippled through the Old Town all the way up to the base of the Citadel. Twenty
thousand homes and businesses burned or were flattened by shelling. The Chapel of Kiodras Militant was blown
apart. The public kitchens and the studios of the iconographers were blasted through and trampled under churning
tracks. The Ayatani Scholam and the subsidiaries of the esholi were destroyed, and their brick litter toppled into the
holy river. The ancient stones of the Indehar Sholaan Sabbat Bridge were hurled a hundred and fifty metres into the
air. The Pardus armour ploughed on, directed by Colonel Furst and Major Kleopas. They were one of the best armour
units in this segmentum.
Old Town, and everything and everyone in it, didn’t stand a chance.
FOUR
THE COLONEL AT BAY
“Lay a fire within your soul and another between your hands, and let both be your weapons.
“For one is faith and the other is victory and neither may ever be put out.”
—Saint Sabbat, lessons
The room shook. The walls and floor jarred slightly. Dust dribbled from the rafters. Onion-flasks full of water
clinked against each other.
No one seemed to notice at first, except Corbec himself. He was sprawled on the floor, and he could feel the
flagstones stirring under his palms and fingertips.
He looked up, but none of the Infardi had felt it. They were too busy with Yael. The boy was dead now; for that
much Corbec was thankful, though it meant it would soon be his own turn on the bench. But the Infardi were still
finishing their ritual butchery, adorning the corpse with shunned symbols while they muttered verses from polluted
texts.
The room shook again. The bottles clinked. More dust trickled down.
Despite the gravity of his situation, perhaps even because of it Colm Corbec smiled.
A shadow fell across him.
“Why do you smile?” Pater Sin asked.
“Death’s coming,” Corbec replied, spitting a wad of bloody saliva into the floor dust.
“Do you welcome it?” Sin’s voice was low, almost breathless. Corbec saw that Sin’s metal teeth were so sharp
they cut the inside of the bastard’s own lips.
“I welcome death all right,” Corbec said. He sat up slightly. “Takes me away from you for one thing. But I’m
smiling ’cause it’s not coming for me.”
The room shook again. Pater Sin felt it and looked around. His men stopped what they were doing. With curt
words and gestures, Sin sent three of them hurrying from the room to investigate.
Corbec didn’t need anyone to tell him what it was. He’d been close to enough mechanised assaults in his time to
know the signs. The hard shocks of shells falling, the background vibration of heavy armour…
The room shook yet again, and this time there was a triple-peal of noise loud enough to be clearly identified as
explosions. The Infardi were gathering up their weapons. Sin stalked over to one man who had a light vox unit and
exchanged calls with other Infardi units.
By then, the shaking and the sound of the explosions was a constant background noise.
Sin looked over at Corbec.
“I expected this, sooner or later. You presume it’s taken me by surprise, but in fact it’s precisely what I…”
He paused, as if unwilling to give away secrets even to a half-dead old foot-slogger.
Sin made several guttural noises — Corbec decided they must be command words in the Infardi’s private combatcode
— and the gunmen made ready to leave en masse. Four of them grabbed Corbec and dragged him up with them.
Pain flared through his torso, but he bit his lip.
His captors pulled and shoved him along dirty hallways and across an open courtyard behind the main body of the
Infardi gunmen. In the yard, the sunlight was harsh and painful to Corbec, and the open air brought the sounds of the
Imperial assault to him with greater clarity: the overlapping, meaty thump of explosions, the swooping air-rush of
shells, the clanking grind of tracks, the slithering collapses of masonry.
Corbec found himself almost hopping along, trying to favour the foot with the boot on it. The Infardi punched and
jabbed him, cursing him. They wanted to move faster than he could go. Besides, keeping one hand on him meant they
each had only one hand free to manage ammo satchels, las-rifles and their other accoutrements.
They pressed on through the interior of a stonecutter’s workshop where everything was coated thumb-deep in
white stone dust, before emerging through a set of wooden shutters into a steep, cobbled street.
Above, not more than two kilometres away, rose the Citadel. It was the closest Corbec had been to the building.
Its bleached cliff edges, fringed in mauve mosses and feathery lichens, thrust up above the skirt of roofs and towers
formed by Old Town and the eastern hill quarters of the Doctrinopolis, supporting the ashlar-dressed pillars and
temples of the holy city’s royal precincts. The monumental buildings were flesh-pink against the blue of the sky. Sin’s
men must have taken him and Yael a good way north through the Old Town.
Looking the other way, the street swept down through the jumbled old dwellings and massy stoneshops towards
the river plain where the Old Town started. The sky that way was a whirling haze of black and grey smoke. Fire
licked through the town’s flanks. Corbec could see series after series of shell-strikes fan in ripples through the
streets. Geysers of flame, smoke, earth and masonry blew up into the air.
His guards pulled at him again and forced him up the slope of the street. Most of the other Infardi had already
disappeared into the surrounding buildings.
The gunmen jostled him off the street, through a cast-iron gate into a level yard where stones and tiles were
stacked ready for use. To one side, under an awning, sat three flat-pan work barrows and some cutter’s tools; to the
other, a pair of heavy old-pattern servitors that had been deactivated.
The men pushed Corbec down on the barrows. Pater Sin reappeared with eight other men, moving from an inner
door across the yard, and words were exchanged.
Corbec waited. The barrows were covered in dusty sacking. The masons’ tools were nearby: four big adzes, a
worn mallet, some chisels, a diamond-bladed trowel. Even the smaller items were not small enough for him to
conceal.
A whistling scream shook the yard as a shell passed directly overhead. It detonated in the neighbouring building
and blew brick chips and smoke back over them with a boneshaking roar. Corbec pressed his head down into the
sacking.
He felt something under the sacking, reached for it.
A heavy weight, small, about the size of a child’s fist or a ripe ploin, with a cord attached. A stonecutter’s plumbline;
a hard lead weight on the end of four metres of plaited silk string. Trying not to let them see, he tugged it out of
the sacking on the barrow and wound it into his hand.
Pater Sin barked some more orders to his men, and then engaged his body-shield, effectively vanishing from view.
Corbec saw his hazy shape, crackling in the dustclouds kicked up from the near-hit, leave the yard by the far side,
accompanied by all but three of the men.
They turned back to him, approaching.
A salvo of tank shells fell on the street around with numbing force and noise. Luck alone had caused them to
bracket the yard or, Corbec realised, he and his captors would have been pulped. As it was, all three Infardi were
knocked over on their faces. Corbec, who had a more experienced ear for shelling times and distances than the
cultists, had braced himself at the first whistle of the incoming shells.
He leapt up. One of the Infardi was already rising groggily, lasrifle swinging up to cover the prisoner.
Corbec spun the looped plumb-line in his hand quickly, letting the lead soar free on the third turn. It smashed into
the gunman’s left cheek with a satisfying crack and sent him tumbling back to the floor.
Corbec now spun the line over his head at the full length of its cord. He had built up enough force by the time the
second gunman jumped up that it wrapped four times around his throat and cinched tight.
Choking, the cultist fell, trying to get the tough, tight cord off his throat.
Corbec grabbed his lasrifle, and managed to roll with it and fire off a pair of shots as the first Infardi got up again.
He was firing as he rose, the dent of the plumb-weight braising his face. Corbec’s shots went through his chest and
tossed him over on to his back.
Clutching his captured weapon, Corbec stood up. More shells fell close by. He put a shot through the head of the
Infardi who was still trying to get the line off his neck.
The third was face down, dead. The close blast had buried a piece of tile in his skull.
The rolling thunder of the barrage was coming closer. There was no time to search the bodies for ammo or
liberate a replacement boot. Corbec figured if he headed up the Old Town hill he could get around the side of the
Citadel plateau and perhaps stay alive. It was undoubtedly what the Infardi were doing.
He went through the doors on the far side of the yard, in the direction Sin had taken. He kept hopping as shards of
debris dug into the sole of his unprotected foot. He passed down a tiled hallway where the force of the blasts had
brought the windows and blinds in, then on into a bay area where iron scaffolding was stored near to a loading ramp.
Between the beat of explosions, close and distant he heard voices. Corbec crouched and peered through the
loading area. The outer doors, tall and old and wooden, had been levered open, and a pair of eight-wheel cargo
tracks had been backed in. Infardi, about a dozen of them, were loading sheet-wrapped objects and wooden crates
into the rear of the vehicles.
There was no sign of Pater Sin.
Corbec checked the power-load of his appropriated weapon. Over three-quarters yield. Enough to make them sit
up and take notice at least.
The burning streets were alive. Humans, locals, fleeing from their devastated homes and hiding places with bundles
of possessions, driving thin, scared livestock before them.
And vermin… tides of vermin… pouring out of the inferno, sweeping down the hill streets of Old Town towards
the river.
Kolea’s team moved against the tide.
Chasing uphill at a ran, with rebreather masks buckled over their faces to shut out the searing smoke, they tried to
head away from the blast front of the encroaching armour brigade while steering a path towards the masons’ district.
Now and then, shells fell so close they were all thrown off their feet by the Shockwaves Torched dwellings
collapsed across streets to block their route. In places, they waded through living streams of rodents, guard-issue
boots crunching on squirming bodies.
The eight Ghosts sprinted across another street junction, wafer-shreds of ash billowing around them, and took
shelter in a leather worker’s shop. It had been gutted by shells, just an empty ruin.
Dorden pulled off his rebreather and started coughing. By his side, Trooper Mkvenner rolled onto his side and
tried to pull a shard of hot glass shrapnel out of his thigh.
“Let me see to it,” Dorden coughed. He used his medicae kit tweezers to tug the sliver out and washed the deep
cut with antiseptic from a spray bottle.
Dorden sat back, mopping his brow.
“Thanks, doc,” whispered Mkvenner. “You okay?”
Dorden nodded the question away. He felt half-cooked, wilted, choked. He couldn’t draw breath properly. The
heat from the burning buildings all around was like an oven.
By an exploded doorway in the far wall, Kolea and Sergeant Haller looked out.
“It’s clear that way,” Kolea muttered, pointing.
“For now,” Haller conceded. He waved up troopers Garond and Cuu and sent them dashing over to secure the
premises next door.
Dorden noted that Haller, a Verghastite recruit himself, and a veteran of the Vervun Primary regiment favoured the
troops he knew from his homeworld: Garond and Cuu, both Verghastites.
Haller was a cautious soul. Dorden felt the sergeant sometimes had too much respect for the heroic Tanith to give
them orders.
The old medic eyed the other members of the squad: Mkvenner, Wheln, Domor and Rafflan, the other Tanith men.
Harjeon was the only other Vervunhiver. A small, blond man with a wispy moustache, Harjeon cowered in the
shelled out corner of the premises.
Dorden noted he could see a pecking order now. Kolea’s in charge, and he’s a war hero, so no one argues.
Haller’s ex-hive military, and so’s Garond. Cuu… well, he’s a law unto himself, an ex-ganger from the lowest hive
levels, but no one doubts his mettle or his fighting smarts.
Harjeon… An ex-civilian. Dorden wasn’t sure what Harjeon’s calling had been in pre-guard life. A tailor? A
teacher? Whatever, he rated lowest of all.
If they ever got out of this alive, Dorden knew he’d have to talk to Gaunt about evening up the prejudices that the
new influx brought with them.
Volcanically, shells splashed down across the end of the street. They were showered with debris.
“Let’s move!” Haller cried and took off after Cuu and Garond. Kolea waited, waving Harjeon and the Tanith past.
Dorden reached the doorway, and looked at Kolea as he adjusted his rebreather mask.
“We really should go back…” he began.
“Into that, doctor?” Kolea asked, gesturing back at the firestorm that boiled up through Old Town after them.
“We’re out of options, I’m afraid,” Kolea said. “Just to stay alive, we’ve got to keep ahead of the shells. So we
might as well keep on and see if we can find Corbec.”
They ran through a wall of heat into the next ruin. Dorden saw the bare skin on his wrists and forearms was
blistering in the crisping air.
They darted into the next building. It was remarkably intact and the air within mercifully cool. From the window,
Dorden watched as shells slammed down close by. The building across the street seemed to shunt sideways, whole
and complete, before disintegrating.
“Close, huh, Tanith?”
Dorden glanced round and met the eyes of Trooper Cuu.
Trooper Cuu. Lijah Cuu. Something of a legend already in the regiment. Just under two metres, slim, corded with
muscle. Lean with a face like a bad lie. That’s how Corbec had described him.
Cuu had been a ganger in Vervunhive before the war. Some said he’d killed more men in gang fights than he had in
battle. He was tattooed extensively, and sold his ability with ink and needle to appreciative Verghastites. A long scar
split his face top to bottom.
Trooper Cuu called everyone “Tanith”, like it was a scornful insult.
“Close enough for me,” Dorden said.
Cuu flexed around and checked over his lasrifle. His movements were feline and quick, Dorden thought. A cat,
that’s just what he is. A scarred and ragged tomcat. Even down to his chilly green eyes. Dorden had spent the last
odd years in the company of exceptionally dangerous men. Rawne, that ruthless snake… Feygor, a soulless killer…
but Cuu…
A casebook sociopath, if ever he’d seen one. The man had made a life of gang-fights and blade-wars long before
the crusade had come along to legitimise his talents. Just being close to Cuu with his vivid tattoo gang marks and
cold, lifeless eyes made Dorden uneasy.
“What’s the matter, doc? Got no stomach for it?” Cuu chuckled, sensing Dorden’s unease. “Better you stayed at
your nice safe aid station, huh?”
“Absolutely,” Dorden said and moved across to a place between Rafflan and Domor.
Trooper Domor had lost his eyes on Menazoid Epsilon, and augmetic surgeons had rebuilt his face around a pair
of military gauge optic sensors. The Tanith men called him “Shogg”, after the bug-eyed amphibian they decided he
now resembled.
Dorden knew Domor well, and counted him a friend. He knew that Domor’s implants could read heat and
movement through stone walls and brick facades.
“You see much?”
“It’s all empty ahead,” Domor replied, the milled focus rings of his implants whirring as they moved around on
automatic. “Kolea should put me up front. Me and Mkvenner.”
Dorden nodded. Mkvenner was one of the Tanith’s elite scout troopers, trained by the infamous Mkoll himself.
Between his senses and Domor’s augmetic sight, they could be moving ahead with a great deal more confidence.
Dorden decided to speak to Kolea and Haller about it. He moved forward towards the bulky shape of the big
miner and the lean figure of Haller, who still wore his spiked Vervun Primary helmet as part of his battledress.
A Shockwave threw him off his feet into the far wall. Plaster smashed and slid away as he hit it.
For a fleeting, peaceful second, he saw his wife, and his daughter, long gone with Tanith itself and his son Mikal,
dead these last few months on Verghast far away…
Mikal smiled, and detached himself from the embrace of his sister and his mother. He stepped towards his father.
“Sabbat Martyr,” he said.
“What?” Dorden replied. His mouth and nose were full of blood and he couldn’t talk clearly. The joy and pain of
seeing his son was making him cry. “What did you say?”
“Sabbat Martyr. Don’t die, dad. It’s not your time.”
“Mikal, I…”
“Doc! Doc!”
Dorden opened his eyes. Pain shuddered through his waking body. He couldn’t see.
“Oh feth,” he gurgled, blood filling his mouth.
Rough hands yanked his mask off and he heard liquid pattering on the rubble. He blinked.
Wheln and Haller were bent over him, anxious looks on their faces. “W-what?” Dorden mumbled.
“Thought you were fething dead!” Wheln cried.
They helped him sit up. Dorden wiped his face and saw his hand came away bloody. He checked his face and
realised his nose was streaming blood. The nosebleed had filled his mask and blinded his eye-slits.
“Feth!” he snarled, getting up. His head swam and he sat back.
“Who did we lose?” he asked. “No one,” Haller said.
Dorden looked around. The shell had taken out the west wall of the building, but all his comrades were intact:
Kolea, Cuu, Garond, Rafflan, Mkvenner, Harjeon.
“Charmed lives,” said Cuu with a chuckle.
With the help of Wheln and Haller, Dorden got to his feet. He felt like the spirit had been blasted out of him.
“You all right?” Kolea asked.
Dorden spat clotted blood and wiped his face. “Just dandy,” he said. “If we’re going, let’s just go, right?”
Kolea nodded, and signalled the party to their feet.
Firestorms were ripping down both sides of the street by them, and further shells were adding to the inferno.
Behind the dwelling, they found that the shell had blown open a watercourse gurgling below street level in a brick
defile.
Kolea and Mkvenner leapt down into it. The brackish water, perhaps an ancient tributary of the holy river, surged
around their boots.
Dorden followed them down. It was cooler here, and the moving water seemed to wash away the thick smoke.
“Let’s move along it,” Kolea suggested. No one argued.
In a tight line, the seven Ghosts tracked up the watercourse through the fires.
They’d gone no more than a hundred metres when Trooper Cuu suddenly held up his hand. The crude tatts of a
skull and crossbones marked his knuckles.
“Hear that?” he asked. “Las-fire!”
Corbec’s shots tore through the loading bay. Two Infardi were slammed back off the side of one of the trucks.
Another toppled, dropping the crate he had been carrying.
They started firing back almost immediately, pulling handguns from their sashes or grabbing the lasrifles leaning
up against the wall. Glittering laser fire and whining hard rounds hammered into the stacked scaffolding around
Corbec.
He didn’t flinch. Kicking over a stack of scaffolding, he ran down the length of the bay’s side wall, firing from the
hip. Another Infardi clutched his throat, fell on his back and slithered off the bed of one of the trucks.
A bullet creased his tricep. A las-round tore through the thigh pocket of his combat pants.
He threw himself into cover behind an archway pillar.
It went unpleasantly quiet. Gunsmoke and the coppery stink of las discharge filled the air.
Corbec lay still, trying to slow his breathing. He could hear them moving around.
An Infardi came around the pillar and Corbec shot him through the face. A torrent of shots poured in his direction
and the Tanith colonel started to crawl on his hands and knees down the stone passage. The wood-panelled walls
above began to splinter and shred into the air as solid and energy rounds rained into them.
There was a doorway to his left. He rolled across into it, and got up. His hands were shaking. His chest hurt so
much he could barely think any longer.
The room was an office of some sort. There were book cases and a large clerical desk lined with pigeon holes.
Sheets of paper coated the floor, some fluttering in the breeze from the small, broken window high in the end wall.
There was no way out. The window was about large enough for him to stick his arm out of and that was it.
“Feth me..” Corbec murmured to himself, wiping a hand through his matted beard. He hunched down behind the
heavy desk and laid the barrel of his weapon over the desktop, pointing at the doorway.
The gun’s power cell was all but a quarter spent now. It was an old, battered Imperial issue job, with an L-shaped
piece of metal brace welded on in place of the original stock. The makeshift brace jutted into his collarbone, but he
aimed up as best he could, remembering all the things Larkin had taught him about spot shooting.
A figure in green silk darted across the door mouth, too fast for Corbec to hit. His wasted shot smacked into the far
wall. Another swung round into the doorway, firing on auto with a small calibre machine pistol. The spray of bullets
went high over Corbec’s head and destroyed a bookshelf. Corbec put a single round into the Infardi’s chest and
threw him back out of sight.
“You messed with the wrong man, you bastards!” he yelled. “You should have finished me when you had the
chance! I’m gonna take the head off anyone who comes through that door!”
I just hope they don’t have grenades, he thought.
Another Infardi ducked in, fired twice with his lasgun and jumped back out. Not fast enough. Corbec’s shot didn’t
kill him but it went through his arm. He could hear whimpering outside.
Now a lasgun came around the doorframe, held out blind and firing. Two shots hit the desk hard enough to jerk it
back against him. He shot back and the gun disappeared.
Now he could smell something. An intense chemical stink.
Liquid promethium.
They had a flamer out there.
Gol Kolea snapped his fingers and made three quick gestures.
Mkvenner, Harjeon and Haller sprinted forward to the left, down the side of the stonemason’s shop. Domor,
Rafflan and Garond ran right, around to the gaping entrance of the loading bay that opened onto the narrow back
street. Cuu headed forward, jumped up onto a rainwater tank and from there swung up onto the sloping roof.
With Dorden at his heels, Kolea moved after them. The chatter of las and solid firing from inside the buildings
was audible over the roar of the advancing tank assault down the hill behind them.
Domor, Rafflan and Garond rushed the bay doors, firing tight bursts. They came in on half a dozen Infardi who
turned in abject surprise to meet their deaths.
Mkvenner, Harjeon and Haller kicked in big leaded windows and fired into the bay, cutting down a trio of Infardi
who were running back through, alerted by the sudden firing.
Cuu shot in a skylight and began picking off targets below.
Kolea went in through a side door, firing twice to drop an Infardi trying to flee that way.
Dorden watched the Ghosts at work with awe. It was a stunning display of precision tactics, exactly the sort of
work that the Tanith First-and-Only was famous for.
Caught from several angles at once, the enemy panicked and started to die.
One of the trucks spluttered into life and spun its heavy wheels as it started to speed out of the bay. Domor and
Rafflan were in its way, and stood their ground, firing their lasguns from the shoulder, peppering the cab. Garond, to
the side, raked the vehicle as it ran past.
Sharp-edged punctures stung the cab’s metalwork. The windows shattered. It veered drunkenly, smashing a crate
waiting to be stacked and rolling over the sprawled corpses of two Infardi with nauseating crunches.
At the last moment, Rafflan and Domor dived aside. The truck sped right across the back alley and battered nosefirst
into the opposite wall, which caved in around it.
Rafflan and Domor advanced into the bay, joining up with Garond and then with Kolea and Dorden. The soldiers
formed a straggled knot, firing safety shots into corners where the collecting weapon-smoke blocked vision.
Dorden felt his pulse racing. He felt exposed, and more, he felt elated. To be part of this. Killing was misery and
war was a bestial waste, but glory and valour… they were something else. Pleasures so intense and so
fundamentally contiguous with the horrors he abominated, they made him feel guilty to cherish them. At times like
this, he understood why mankind made war, and why it celebrated its warriors above all others. At times like this he
could understand Gaunt himself. To see well-trained men like Kolea’s squad take down a significantly larger force
with discipline, skill and daring….
“Check the other vehicle,” Kolea snapped, and Rafflan turned aside to do so. Domor went ahead and covered the
corner into a short passageway.
“Flamer!” he cried, leaping back, and a moment later fire gouted out of the passageway mouth.
Kolea pushed Dorden into cover and keyed his microbead.
“Haller?”
“Inside, sir! We’re coming at you from the east. A little light opposition.” From the bay they could all hear the las
exchanges.
“Go slow: we’ve got a flamer.”
“Understood.”
“I can get him, sure as sure,” Cuu’s voice crackled. “Do it,” Kolea instructed.
Trooper Cuu moved across the shop roof and swung his lithe body down through a gap between broken shutters.
He could see the Infardi with the flamer now, cowering in a passageway outside some kind of office with two other
gunmen.
Cuu could smell the sweet promethium reek.
From thirty metres, he put a las-round through the flamer operator’s skull, then picked off the other two as they
stumbled up in alarm.
“Clear!” he reported, gleefully. He crept forward.
“Who’s out there?” a hoarse voice called from the office.
“That you, colonel?”
“Who’s that? Lillo?”
“Nah, it’s Cuu.”
“Is it clear?”
“Clear as clear.”
Corbec limped cautiously out of the doorway, gun raised, glancing around.
“Gak, ain’t you a mess, Tanith,” smiled Cuu. He flicked open his bead.
“I found Colonel Corbec. Do I win a prize?”
“That’ll do until we reach a proper aid post,” Dorden said, taping the last dressing tightly across Corbec’s chest.
“You can forget about the war, colonel. This’ll see you bed-ridden for a good two weeks.”
Weary and broken by pain, Corbec simply nodded. They were seated on crates in the bay while the other Ghosts
regrouped. Cuu and Wheln were checking bodies.
“You find Sin?” Corbec asked.
Kolea shook his head. “We count twenty-two dead. No sign of Sin, leastways not anybody who matches your
description.”
Outside, the tremulous rumble of the armour wave was closer.
“What’s Gaunt doing sending the infantry ahead of the tanks?” Corbec asked. Kolea didn’t reply. Rafflan looked
away, embarrassed. “Sergeant?”
“This is unofficial,” Dorden replied for Kolea. “We came hunting for you.”
Corbec shook his head. “Against orders?”
“The Pardus armour is putting Old Town to the torch. The assault on the Citadel has begun. The commissar
ordered all infantry groups out.”
“But you came looking for me? Feth, was this your idea, Kolea?”
“We all kind of went along,” said Dorden. “I thought you had more sense, doc,” Corbec growled. “Help me up.”
Dorden supported Corbec as he shuffled over to the bay doors.
The colonel took a long look down the hill at the nightmare of fire and destruction moving up towards them.
“We’re dead if we stay here,” Corbec said glumly.
“Right enough,” Mkvenner said. “I reckon we should use that truck. Drive on over the hill, away from the assault.”
“That’s Infardi territory!” Garond exclaimed.
“True, but I rate our chances that way higher. Besides, I’d guess they were falling back by now.”
“What’s the matter, colonel?” Dorden asked, seeing a look on Corbec’s face.
“Pater Sin,” he said. “I can’t figure it. We thought he was up in the Capital. I don’t understand why he was down
here in Old Town.”
“Driving his men? Hands-on, like Gaunt?”
Corbec shook his head. “There was something else. He almost told me.”
Haller got up into the cab of the truck and turned the engine over. On the flatbed, Harjeon had opened one of the
crates.
“What’s this?” he called.
The crate was full of icons and holy statuettes, prayer texts, reliquaries. The men opened the other crates and
found them all to be full of similar artefacts.
“Where is this all from?” asked Rafflan.
Kolea shrugged.
“The shrines of the Citadel. They must have plundered them all.” Corbec gazed down into one of the open crates.
“But why? Why take all this stuff? Why not just smash it? It’s not sacred to them, is it?”
“Let’s work it out later.”
The Ghosts climbed up into the rear of the truck. Haller took the wheel with Wheln riding shotgun beside him.
They rolled out of the battle-torn bay onto the backstreet, edged around the wreck of the other truck, and sped
away up the hill.
“Just after six o’clock,” local time, a brigade-strength force of Brevian Centennials led by Major Szabo scaled the
Holy Causeway and entered the Citadel. They met no resistance. The storm assault of the Pardus tanks had broken
the back of the Infardi grip on the Doctrinopolis. Sixteen square kilometres of the city, the areas of Old Town
flanking the noble plateau, were on fire and dead. Scout recons estimated what little numbers the Infardi could still
muster had fled north, out of the city and into the rainwoods of the hinterland.
A victory, Gaunt realised, as Szabo’s initial reports were relayed to him by the vox-operator. They had taken the
Doctrinopolis and driven the foe out. Pockets of resistance remained — there was a hell of a street fight raging in the
western suburbs — and it would take months to hunt out the Infardi who had gone to ground outside the city. But it
was a victory. Lord General Lugo would be pleased. Or at least satisfied. In short order, Szabo’s men would raise
the Imperial standard above the Citadel, and under the fluttering aquila, the place would be theirs again. Hagia was
theirs. A world liberated.
Gaunt climbed down from the command tractor and wandered alone down the street. He felt oddly out of sorts.
There had been precious little glory in this theatre. His men had acquitted themselves well, of course, and he was
happy to see the Tanith working confidently and efficiently alongside the Verghastite newcomers.
But it hadn’t gone the way he would have liked. It might have cost him more in time and casualties, but he resented
the fact that Lugo hadn’t allowed him to clear Old Town and make a clean job of it. The Pardus were exemplary
soldiers, and they’d cracked this nut. But the city had suffered unnecessarily.
He stood alone for a while in a prayer yard, watching the votive flags and kites dancing in the wind. The yard was
littered with chips of stained glass thrown out when tank shells had gutted a nearby shrine.
This was the sacred bead’s world, Saint Sabbat’s world. He would have taken it whole, out of respect for her, not
ruined it to crush the foe.
The darkening evening sky was thick with sooty smoke. Thanks to Lugo and his hunger for victory, they had razed
a third of one of the most holy sites in the Imperium. He would resent this all his life, he realised. If Lugo had left
him alone, he could have liberated the Doctrinopolis and left it standing.
Macaroth would hear of this.
Gaunt stepped into the cold silence of the ruined shrine and removed his brocaded cap before advancing down the
temple aisle. Glass shards cracked under his jack boots with every pace. He reached the altar and knelt down.
Sabbat Martyr!
Gaunt started and looked round. The whisper had come from right behind him, in his ear. There was no one in
sight. His imagination…
He settled back onto one knee. He wanted to make his peace with the saint in this holy place, to see if he could
make amends for the excessive way they had driven out the infidel. And there was Corbec too, a loss that he would
really feel.
But his mouth was dry. The words of the Imperial catechism would not form. He tried to relax, and his mind
sought out the words of the Throne Grace he’d been taught as a child at the Scholam Progenium on Ignatius Cardinal.
Even that simple, elementary prayer would not come.
Gaunt cleared his throat. The wind moaned through the broken window lights.
He bowed his head and—
Sabbat Martyr!
The hiss again, right beside him. He leapt up, drawing his boltgun and holding it out at arm’s length.
“Who’s there? Come out! Show yourself!”
Nothing stirred. Gaunt snapped his aim around, left, right left again.
Slowly, he slid the heavy hand gun back into his leather button-down holster. He turned back to the altar and knelt
again.
He let out a long breath and tried to pray again. “Sir! Commissar, sir!”
Vox-trooper Beltayn was running frantically in through the temple doors, his vox-set falling off his shoulder and
swinging round on its strap to bump against the end of the pews.
“Sir!”
“What is it, Beltayn?”
“You’ve got to hear this, sir! Something’s awry!”
Awry. Beltayn’s favourite word, always used as a masterpiece of understatement. “The invading orks have killed
everyone, sir! Something’s awry!”… “Everything’s been awry since the genestealers turned up, sir…!”
“What?”
Beltayn thrust out the headset to his commander. “Listen!”
Major Szabo’s Brevoans moved into the Citadel, fanning out weapons ready. The towering shrines were silent and
empty, pinkish stone gleaming in the light of the setting sun.
As they moved out of the sunlight into the slanted shadows of the temple pylons, Szabo felt a chill, as cold as
anything he’d suffered in the winter-wars on Aex Eleven.
The men had been chatting freely and confidently as they advanced up the Citadel hill. Now their voices were
gone, as if stolen by the silence of these ancient tombs and empty temples.
There was nothing, Szabo realised. No priests, no Infardi, no bodies, not even a speck of litter or a sign of
damage.
He fanned the Brevians out with a few brisk hand signals. In their mustard-drab fatigues and body armour, the fireteams
clattered forward down parallel avenues of stelae Szabo selected a vox-channel.
“Brevia one. Zero resistance in the Citadel. It’s damn quiet.” He looked around, and sent Sergeant Vulle ahead
into the lofty Chapel of the Avenging Heart with twenty men. Szabo himself advanced into a smaller chapter house
where the Ecclesiarchy choir had lived.
Inside the portico, he saw the row of empty alcoves where the household shrine should have been.
Vulle voxed in from Avenging Heart. Every holy item, every icon, every text, every worship statuette, had been
removed from the famous chapel. Other fire-teams voxing in from around the temple precinct reported the same.
Altars were empty, votive alcoves were bare, relic houses were empty.
Szabo didn’t like it. His men were edgy. They’d expected some fighting, at least. This was meant to be Pater Sin’s
bolt hole, the place where he’d make his last stand.
The Brevians spread out through the vast colonnades and temple walks. Nothing stirred except the wind across
this high plateau.
With a lag-team of eight men, Szabo entered the main shrine, the Tempelum Infarfarid Sabbat, a towering
confection of pink ashlar and cyclopean pillars, rising three hundred metres above the heart of the Citadel precinct.
Here too the altar was bare. The size of a troop carrier, the colossal, gilt-swathed altar bore no branches of
candelabras, no censers, no triptych screen, no aquila.
There was an odd scent in the air, a tangy smell like thick oil being fried, or pickled fish.
Szabo’s lips were suddenly moist. He licked them and tasted copper.
“Sir, your nose…” his scout said, pointing.
Szabo wiped his nose and realised blood was weeping out of it. He looked around and saw that every man in his
squad was leaking blood from their nose or their eyes. Someone started whimpering. Trooper Emith suddenly
pitched over onto his face, stone dead.
“Great God-Emperor!” Szabo cried. Another of his men fell in a faint as blood poured out his tear ducts.
“Vox-officer!” shouted Szabo. He reached out. The smell was getting stronger, a thousand times more intense.
Time seemed to be slowing down. He watched his own hand as he reached it out in front of him. How slow! Time
and the very air around them seemed to have become treacle-thick and heavy. He saw his men, slowed down in time
like insects in sap. Some half-fallen, limbs outstretched, some convulsing, some on their knees. Perfect, glinting
droplets of blood hung in the air.
Someone had done this. Someone had been ready. They’d stripped the shrines of their holy, warding charms. And
left something else in their place.
Something lethal.
“A trap! A trap!” Szabo yelled into the vox. His mouth was full of blood. “We’ve set something off by coming in
here! We—”
The choking overwhelmed him. Szabo let go of the vox handset and retched blood onto the polished floor of the
Tempelum Infarfarid Sabbat.
“Oh Holy Emperor…” Szabo mumbled. There were maggots in the blood.
Time stopped dead. Over the Doctrinopolis, night fell prematurely.
In a flare of blue light, like the petals of a translucent orchid a kilometre across, the Citadel exploded.
FIVE
THE BECKONING
“From this high rock, from this peak, let the light of worship shine so that the Emperor himself might see it
from his Golden Throne.”
—dedication on the high altar of the Tempelum Infarfarid Sabbat
The Citadel burned for many days. It burned without flames, or at least without any flames known to mankind. Mistblue
and frost-green tongues of incandescent energy leapt kilometres into the air like some flailing part of an aurora
display anchored to the plateau. They fluttered helplessly in the wind. Their glare cast long shadows in daylight, and
illuminated the night. At their base, the blues and greens became white hot a blistering inferno that utterly consumed
the temples and buildings of the Citadel, and the heat could be felt half a kilometre away down the hillslopes.
No one could approach closer than that. The few scout squads that ventured nearer were driven back by nausea,
spontaneous bleeding or paroxysms of insane fear. Observations made from a safe distance by scopes or
magnoculars revealed that the stone cliffs of the plateau were melting and twisting. Rock bubbled and deformed. One
observer went mad, raving that he’d seen screaming faces form and loom out of the oozing stone.
At the end of the first day, a delegation of local ayatani and ecclesiarchs from the Imperial Guard retinues set up
temporary shrines around the slopes of the Citadel and began a vigil of supplication, appeasement and banishment.
A dismal mood of defeat settled on the Doctrinopolis. This was an unparalleled disaster, worse even than the
Infardi’s annexation of the holy city. This was desecration. This was the darkest possible omen.
Gaunt was withdrawn. His mood was black and few dared to disturb him, even his most trusted Ghosts. He lurked
in private chambers in the Universitariat, brooding and reviewing reports. He slept wretchedly.
Even the news that Corbec had been recovered, injured but alive, failed to lift his spirits much. Many believed
that Gaunt’s mood was so dark he would now mete severe punishment on Kolea’s unit for disobeying the withdrawal
orders, despite the fact they had saved the colonel.
The ayatani conducted a service of thanksgiving for the holy icons and relics Kolea’s unit had brought back in the
captured truck. It was a small, redemptive consolation in the face of the Citadel’s destruction. The items were
solemnly rededicated and placed in the Basilica of Macharius Hagio at the edge of the Old Town.
The surviving Brevians, two brigades who had not deployed into the Citadel with Szabo, entered into a ritual of
remorseful fasting and mourning. A mass funeral oration was made on the second day, during which the roll of the
fallen was read out name by name. Gaunt attended, in full dress uniform, but spoke to no one. The guns of the Pardus
Armour thundered the salute.
On the morning of the fourth day, Brin Milo crossed the Square of Sublime Tranquillity and hurried up the steps of
the Universitariat’s south gate with a feeling of dread inside him. Tanith sentries at the gatehouse let him past and he
walked through echoing halls and drafty chambers where teams of esholi worked in silence to salvage what they
could of the books, papers and manuscripts the Infardi had left torn and scattered in the ransacked rooms.
He saw Sanian, industriously picking paper scraps from a litter of glass chips under a shattered window, but she
didn’t acknowledge him. Afterwards, he wondered if it had actually been her. With their white robes and shaved
heads, the female esholi affected an alarming uniformity.
He turned at a cloister corner, trotted up a set of stone stairs under the watchful, oil-painted stares of several ex-
Universitariat principals, and crossed a landing to a pair of wooden doors.
Milo took a deep breath, tossed the folds of his camo-cape over his shoulder and knocked.
The door opened. Trooper Caffran let him through.
“Hey, Caff.”
“Brin.”
“How is he?”
“Fethed if I know.”
Milo looked around. Caffran had let him into a small anteroom. A pair of shabby couches had been pulled up
under the window to serve as makeshift daybeds for the door guards. On a side table were a few dirty mess trays,
some ration packs, and some bottles of water and local wine. Sergeant Soric, Caffran’s partner on watch duty, sat
nearby, playing Devils and Dames Solo with a pack of buckled cards. He was using an upturned ammo box as a
table.
He looked up and grinned his one eyed, lop-sided grin at Milo.
“He hasn’t stirred,” he said simply.
Milo didn’t have the measure of Soric yet. A squat slabby barrel of a man, Agun Soric had been an ore smeltery
boss on Verghast then a guerrilla leader. Though overweight, he had massive physical power, the legacy, like his
hunched posture, of hard years at the ore face as a youth. And he was old, older than Corbec, older even than Doc
Dorden, who was the oldest of the Tanith. He had the same avuncular manner as Corbec, but was wilder somehow,
more unpredictable, more given to anger. He’d lost an eye at Vervunhive, and had refused both augmetic implant or
patch. He wore the puckered wink of scar tissue proudly. Milo knew the Verghastite Ghosts adored him, maybe even
more than they did the noble, taciturn Gol Kolea, but he sensed Soric was still a Verghast man in his heart. He’d do
anything for his own men, but was less forthcoming with the Tanith. To Milo, he typified the few amongst both Tanith
and Verghastite who perpetuated the divide rather than seeking to close it.
“I have to see him,” Milo said. He wanted to say that Major fething Rawne had told him to come and see Gaunt
because Major fething Rawne didn’t fancy doing it himself, but there was no point getting into it.
“Be my guest,” Soric grinned disparagingly, gesturing to the inner doors.
Milo looked at Caffran, who shrugged. “He won’t let us in except to bring him meals, and he doesn’t eat half of
those. Gets through a feth of a lot of these, though.” Caffran pointed to the empty wine bottles.
Milo’s unease grew. He’d been worried about disturbing Gaunt when his mood was bad. No one wanted to
confront an ill-disposed Imperial commissar. But now he was worried about Gaunt himself. He’d never been a
drinker. He’d always had such great composure and confidence. Like all commissars, he had been created to inspire
and uplift.
Milo knew things here on Hagia had turned bad, but now he was afraid they might have taken Gaunt with them.
“Do you knock, or should I just—” Milo began, pointing at the inner doors. Caffran backed off with a shrug and
Soric pointedly refused to look up from his dog-eared cards.
“Thanks a lot,” Milo said, and walked to the doors with a sigh.
The inner chambers were dark and quiet. The drapes were drawn and there was an unpleasantly musty smell. Milo
edged inside. “Colonel-commissar?”
There was no answer. He walked further in, blind in the gloom as his night vision tried to adjust.
Groping his way, he slammed into a book stand and sent it crashing over.
“Who’s there? Who the feth is there?”
The anger in the voice made Milo start. Gaunt loomed in front of him, unshaven and half-dressed, his eyes fierce
and bloodshot.
He was pointing his bolt pistol at Milo.
“Feth! It’s me, sir! Milo!”
Gaunt stared at Milo for a moment, as if he didn’t recognise him, and then turned away, tossing his gun onto a
couch. He was wearing only his jackboots and uniform breeches, and his braces dangled slackly around his hips.
Milo glimpsed the massive scar across Gaunt’s trim belly, the old wound he had taken at Dercius’ hands on Khed
1173.
“You woke me,” Gaunt growled.
“I’m sorry.”
Gaunt lit an oil lamp with clumsy fingers and sat down on a tub chair. He began leafing urgently through an old,
hidebound tome. Gazing at the book, he reached out without looking to snatch up a glass tumbler from a side table.
He took a deep swig of wine and set it down again.
Milo moved closer. He saw the stacks of unread military communiqués piled by the chair. The top few had been
torn into long shreds, and many of these paper tassels now marked places in the book Gaunt was studying.
“Sir—”
“What?”
“Major Rawne sent me, sir. The lord general is on his way. You should make ready.”
“I am ready.” Gaunt took another swig, his eyes never leaving the book.
“No you’re not. You need a wash. You really need a wash. And you look like shit.”
There was a very long silence. Gaunt’s hands stopped flipping the pages. Milo tensed, regretting his boldness,
waiting for the other shoe to drop.
“This doesn’t answer anything, you know.”
“What sir?” Milo asked, and realised Gaunt was referring to the old book.
“This. The Gospel of Saint Sabbat. I felt sure there would be an answer in here. I’ve been through it line by line.
But nothing.”
“An answer to what sir?”
“To this,” Gaunt said, gesturing about himself. “To this… monstrous disaster.” He reached for his glass again
without looking and succeeded in knocking it onto the floor.
“Feth. Get me another.”
“Another?”
“Over there, over there!” Gaunt snapped impatiently, pointing to a sideboard where numerous bottles and old
glasses stood.
“I don’t think you need another drink. The lord general’s coming.”
“That’s precisely why I need another drink. I don’t intend to spend a moment of my time in the company of that
turd-brained insert if I’m sober.”
“I still don’t—”
“Feth you, you Tanith peasant!” Gaunt snapped venomously and got up, tossing the book to Milo as he strode over
to the sideboard.
Milo caught the book neatly.
“See if you can do better,” Gaunt hissed as he went through the bottles one by one until he found one that wasn’t
empty.
Milo looked at the book, thumbing through, seeing the passages Gaunt had feverishly underlined and scribbled
over.
“‘Defeat is but a step towards victory. Take the step with confidence or you will not ascend.’”
Gaunt swung round sharply, sloshing the overfilled glass he had just poured.
“Where does it say that?”
“It doesn’t. I’m paraphrasing one of your speeches to the men.”
Gaunt hurled the glass at Milo. The boy ducked.
“Feth you! You always were a clever little bastard!”
Milo dropped the book onto the seat of the tub chair. “The lord general’s coming. He’ll be here at noon. Major
Rawne wanted you to know. If that’s all, I request permission to leave.”
“Permission granted. Get the feth out.”
“What did he say? How was he?” Caffran asked as Milo stepped out of the inner rooms and closed the doors behind
him. Milo just shook his head and walked on, out through the ruined hallways of the Universitariat, into the windy
sunlight.
Ten minutes before noon, the sound of distant rotors thumped across the Doctrinopolis. Five dots appeared in the sky
to the south-west, but in the glare of the Citadel fire it was hard to resolve them. “He’s here,” Feygor called.
Major Rawne nodded and smoothed the front of his clean battledress, made sure the campaign medals were
spotless, and carefully put on his cap. He took one last look at himself in the full-length mirror. Despite the crazed
cracks in it, he could tell he still looked every fething centimetre the acting first officer of the Tanith First Regiment.
He turned, and strode out of the derelict dressmaker’s shop that had served as his ready room.
Feygor, Rawne’s adjutant, whistled and fell in step beside him. “Look out ladies, here comes the major.”
“Shut up.”
Feygor smiled. “You’re looking very sharp, I must say”
“Shut up.”
They marched down a debris-strewn side street and out onto the massive concourse of the high king’s royal
summer palace on the holy river. The area had been cleared to allow the lord general’s aircraft to land. Round the
edges of the concourse, four platoons of Ghosts, two platoons of Brevians and three platoons of Pardus stood as an
honour guard, along with delegations of local officials and citizens. There was a military band too, their brass
instruments winking as they caught the sunlight.
The uniforms of the honour guard were clean and spotless. Colonel Furst, Major Kleopas and Captain Herodas
had all put on dress kit. Medals were on show.
Rawne and Feygor approached them across the concourse.
“When you put on your cap, it was just the way Gaunt does it. Brim first.”
“Shut up.”
Feygor smiled and shrugged.
“And fall in,” added Rawne. Feygor, his own matt-black Ghost battle dress immaculate, double-timed and took his
place at the end of the Ghost file. Rawne joined the officers. Furst nodded to him and Herodas stepped back to make
room.
The band started to play. The old hymn “Splendid Men of the Imperium, Stand Up and Fight”. Rawne winced
every time they missed the repeated harmonic minor in the refrain.
“I didn’t know you were a music lover. Major Rawne,” Captain Herodas said quietly.
“I know what I like,” Rawne said through gritted teeth, “and what I’d like right now is for someone to jam that
bass horn up the arse of the bastard who’s molesting it.”
All four officers coughed as they stifled their laughter.
The lord general’s transport approached.
The four ornithopter gunships flying escort thundered overhead, tearing the air with the beating chop of their
massive rotors. They were painted ash-grey with a leopard pattern of khaki blotches. Rawne admired their power,
and the bulbous gun turrets on their chins and the ends of their elongated tails.
Lord General Lugo’s aircraft was a massive delta wing with a spherical glass cockpit at the prow. It was matt
silver with beige jag-stripes and yellow chevrons on the wingtips alongside the Imperial aquila.
Its shadow fell across the honour guard as it paused in mid-air and the giant jet turbines slowly cranked around in
their gimbal mounts from a horizontal position. With jets now flaring downwards, the huge transport descended,
whirling up dust and extending delicate landing struts from cavities in the underwing.
It bounced slightly once, settled, and the screaming jets slowly powered down. A ramp set flush into the sky-blue
painted belly gently unfolded and seven figures emerged.
Lord General Lugo strolled down the ramp, a tall, bony man in a white dress uniform, his chest burdened by the
weight of medals on it. At his heels, two battle-armoured troopers in red and black from the Imperial Crusade staff
marched in escort, hellguns raised. Behind them came a towering, stick-thin woman of advancing years dressed in
the black leather and red braid of the Imperial tacticians, two colonels from the Ardelean Colonials with glittering
breastplates and bright sashes of orange satin, and a thickset man in the uniform of an Imperial commissar.
The group advanced across the concourse and saluted the visitors.
Lugo eyed them all suspiciously, particularly Rawne. “Where’s Gaunt?”
“He… Sir… He…”
“I’m here.”
Dressed in full ceremonial uniform, Ibram Gaunt strode out across the concourse flagstones. From the attentive
ranks of the honour guard, Milo sighed. He was relieved to see that Gaunt was clean and shaved. Gaunt’s silvertrimmed
black leather uniform was immaculate. Perhaps the unpleasant incident in the Universitariat had been just an
aberration…
Gaunt saluted the lord general and introduced his fellow officers. The band played on.
“This is Imperial Tactician Blamire,” said Lugo, indicating the tall, elderly woman. She nodded. Her face was
lean and pinched and her greying hair was cropped.
“I am here because of that…” Lugo said flatly, turning to look across the concourse and the holy city beyond to the
flaring aurora flames flickering over the Citadel.
“That, lord, is an abomination we all regret,” Gaunt said.
“You will bring me up to speed, Gaunt. I want a full report.”
“And you’ll have it,” said Gaunt, guiding the lord general across the concourse to the waiting land cars and their
Chimera escort.
Lugo sniffed suddenly.
“Have you been drinking. Gaunt?”
“Yes, sir. A cup of altar wine during the morning obeisance conducted by the ayatani. It was symbolic and
expected of me.”
“I see. No matter then. Now show me and tell me what I need to know.”
“Starting where, sir?”
“Starting with how this simple liberation turned into a pile of crap,” said Lugo.
“You realise it’s a signal,” said Tactician Blamire, lowering her magnoculars. “A signal?” echoed Colonel Furst.
“Oh yes. The adepts of the Astropathicus have confirmed it as such… it’s generating a significant psychic pulse
with an interstellar range.”
“For what purpose?” asked Major Kleopas.
Blamire fixed him with a craggy gaze, a patient smile on her lips. “Our imminent destruction, of course.”
The party of officers stood on the flat roof of the treasury, escorted by over fifty guardsmen. Prayer kites and
votive flags cracked and shimmied in the air above them.
“I don’t follow,” said Kleopas, “I thought that it was just a spiteful parting gift from the enemy. A booby trap to
sour our victory.”
Blamire shook her head. “Well, it’s not, I’m afraid. That phenomenon—” she gestured to the flickering blaze on
top of the Citadel plateau. “That phenomenon is an operating instrument of the warp. An astropathic beacon. Don’t
think of it as fire. What happened up there four days ago wasn’t an explosion in any conventional sense. Its purpose
wasn’t to destroy the Citadel, or to kill those unfortunate Brevian troops. Its purpose is to beckon.”
“Beckon who?” asked Furst.
“Don’t be dense,” said Gaunt quietly. He fixed Blamire with a direct gaze. The site was significant of course.
“Sacred ground.”
“Of course. The warp-magic of their ritual required the desecration of one of our shrines.”
“That was why they removed all the relics and icons?”
“Yes. And then withdrew to wait for the Brevian Centennials to move in and act as the blood sacrifice to set it off.
This Pater Sin clearly planned this contingency well in advance when it looked like his forces would be ousted.”
“And is it working?” Gaunt asked.
“I’m sorry to say it is.”
There was a long silence broken only by the whip and buffet of the flags and kites above them.
“We have detected an enemy fleet massing and moving through the immaterium towards us,” said Lord General
Lugo.
“Already?” queried Gaunt.
“This summons is clearly something they don’t intend to ignore or be slow about responding to.”
“The fleet… How big?” There was an anxious tone on Kleopas’ voice. “What is the scale of the enemy
response?”
Blamire shrugged, rubbing her gloved hands together uncomfortably. “If it is even a quarter the size we estimate,
the combined liberation force here will be obliterated. Without question.”
“Then we need to reinforce at once! Warmaster Macaroth must retask crusade regiments to assist. We—” Lugo cut
Gaunt off.
“That is not an option. I have communicated the situation to the Warmaster, and he has confirmed my fears. The
recon-quest of the Cabal system is now fully underway. The Warmaster has committed all the crusade legions to the
assault. Many are already en route to the fortress-worlds. There are categorically no reinforcements available.”
“I refuse to accept that!” Gaunt cried. “Macaroth is fully aware of this world’s sacred significance! The saint’s
home world! It’s a vital part of Imperial belief and faith! He wouldn’t just let it burn!”
“The point is moot, colonel-commissar,” said Lugo. “Even if the Warmaster was able to assist us here — and I
assure you, he is not — the nearest Imperial contingents of any useful size are six weeks distant. The arch-enemy’s
fleet is twenty-one days away.”
Gaunt felt helpless rage boil up inside him. It reminded him in the worst way of Tanith and the decisions he had
been forced to make there. For the greater good of the Sabbat Worlds Crusade, another whole damned planet was
going to be sacrificed.
“I have received orders from the Warmaster,” said Lugo. “They are unequivocal. We are to commence immediate
withdrawal from this planet. All Imperial servants, as well as the planetary nobility and priesthood, are to be
evacuated with us, and we are to remove the sacred treasures of this world: relics, antiquities, holy objects, works
of learning. In time, the crusade will return and liberate Hagia once more and, at such a time, the shrines will be
restored and rededicated. Until then, the priests must safeguard Hagia’s holy heritage in exile.”
“They won’t do it,” said Captain Herodas. “I’ve spoken to the local people. Their relics are precious, but only in
conjunction with the location. As the birthplace of Saint Sabbat it is the world that really matters.”
“They will be given no choice,” snapped Lugo. “This is no time for flimsy sentiment. An intensive program of
evacuation begins tonight. The last ship leaves here no later than eighteen days from now. You and your officers will
all be given duties overseeing the smooth and efficient running of said program. Failure will result in the swiftest
censure. Any obstruction of our work will be punishable by death. Am I safe to assume you all understand what is
required?”
Quietly, the assembled officers made it clear they did.
“I’m hungry,” Lugo announced suddenly. “I wish to dine now. Come with me, Gaunt. I wish to explain your
particular duties to you.”
“Let’s be frank about this. Gaunt,” said Lugo, deftly shucking the shell of a steamed bivalve harvested from
celebrated beds a few kilometres down river. “Your career is effectively over.”
“And how do you figure that, sir?” Gaunt replied stiffly, taking a sip of wine. His own dish of gleaming black
shellfish lay largely untouched before him.
Lugo looked up from his meal at Gaunt and finished chewing the nugget of succulent white meat in his mouth
before replying. He dabbed his lips with the corner of his napkin. “I assume you’re joking?”
“Funny,” said Gaunt, “I assumed you were, sir.” He reached for his glass, but realised it was empty, so instead
picked up the bottle for a refill.
Lugo chased a morsel of food out of his cheek with his tongue and swallowed. “This,” he said, with an idle
gesture that was intended to take in the entire city rather than just the drafty, empty dining chamber where they sat,
“this is entirely your fault. You never were in particular favour with the Warmaster, despite your few colourful
successes in the last couple of years. But there’s certainly no coming back from a disgrace like this.” He took up
another bivalve and expertly popped the hinged shell open.
Gaunt sat back and looked around, knowing if he spoke now it would be the beginning of a swingeing rant that
would quite certainly end with him at the wrong end of a firing squad. Lugo was a worm, but he was also a lord
general. Shouting at him would achieve nothing productive. Gaunt waited for his anger to subside a little.
The dining chamber was a high-ceilinged room in the summer palace where the high king had once held state
banquets. The furniture had been cleared except for their single table with its white linen cloth. Six Ardelean
Colonial infantrymen stood watch at the doors, letting through the serving staff when they knocked.
With Lugo and Gaunt at the table was the heavily-built commissar who had arrived with the lord general’s party.
His name was Viktor Hark, and he had said nothing since the start of the meal. Nothing, in fact, since he had stepped
off the aircraft. Hark was a few years younger than Gaunt, with a short, squat stature that suggested a brute muscular
strength generously upholstered in the bulk of good living. His hair was thick and black and his heavy cheeks and
chin were cleanly shaven. His silence and refusal to make any kind of eye contact was annoying Gaunt. Hark had
already finished his shellfish and was mopping up the cooking juices from the dish with chunks of soda bread torn
from a loaf in the basket on the table.
“You’re blaming me for the loss of the Citadel?” Gaunt asked gently.
Lugo widened his eyes in mock query and replied through his mouthful, “You were the commanding officer in this
theatre, weren’t you?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Then who else would I blame? You were charged with the liberation of the Doctrinopolis, and the recapture,
intact of the holy Citadel. You failed. The Citadel is lost, and furthermore, your failure has led directly to the
impending loss of the entire shrineworld. You’ll lose your command, naturally. I think you’ll be lucky to remain in
the Emperor’s service.”
“The Citadel was lost because of the speed with which it was retaken,” Gaunt said, choosing every word
carefully. “My strategy here was slow and methodical. I intended to take the holy city in such a way as to leave it as
intact as possible. I didn’t want to send the tanks into the Old Town.”
“Are you,” Lugo paused, washing his oily fingers in a bowl of petal-scented water and drying them carefully on
his napkin, “are you possibly trying to suggest that I am in some way to blame for this?”
“You made demands, lord general. Though I had achieved my objectives ahead of the planned schedule, you
insisted I was running behind. You also insisted I ditch my prepared strategy and accelerate the assault. I would have
had the Citadel scouted and checked in advance, and such care may have resulted in the safe discovery and
avoidance of the enemy trap. We’ll never know now. You made demands of me, sir. And now we are where we are.”
“I should have you shot for that suggestion, Gaunt,” said Lugo briskly. “What do you think, Hark? Should I have
him shot?”
Hark shrugged wordlessly.
“This is your failure, Gaunt,” said Lugo. “History will see it as such, I will make sure of that. The Warmaster is
already demanding severe reprimand for the officer or officers responsible for this disaster. And, as I pointed out
just now, you’re hardly a favourite of Macaroth’s. Too much of old Slaydo about you.”
Gaunt said nothing.
“You should have been stripped of your rank already, but I’m a fair man. And Hark here suggested you might
perform with renewed dedication if given a task that offered something in the way of redemption.”
“How kind of him.”
“I thought so. You’re a capable enough soldier. Your time as a commanding officer is over, but I’m offering you a
chance to temper your disgrace with a mission that would add a decent footnote to your career. It would send a good
message to the troops, too, I think. To show that even in the light of calamitous error, a true soldier of the Imperium
can make a worthy contribution to the crusade.”
“What do you want me to do?”
“I want you to lead an honour guard. As I have explained, the evacuation is taking with it all of the priesthood, the
what do you call them…?”
“Ayatani,” said Hark, his first spoken word.
“Quite so. All of the ayatani, and all the precious relics of this world. Most precious of all are the remains of the
saint herself, interred at the Shrinehold in the mountains. You will form a detail, travel to the Shrinehold, and return
here with the saint’s bones, conducted with all honour and respect, in time for the evacuation transports.”
Gaunt nodded slowly. He realised he had no choice anyway. “The Shrinehold is remote. The hinterlands and
rainwoods outside the city are riddled with Infardi soldiers who’ve fled this place.”
“Then you may have trouble on the way. In which case, you’ll be moving in force. Your Tanith regiment, in full
strength. I’ve arranged for a Pardus tank company to travel with you as escort. And Hark here will accompany you,
of course.”
Gaunt turned to look at the hefty commissar. “Why?”
Hark looked back, meeting Gaunt’s eyes for the first time. “For the purposes of discipline, naturally. You’re
broken, Gaunt. Your command judgment is suspect. This mission must not be allowed to fail and the lord general
needs assurance that the Tanith First is kept in line.”
“I am capable of discharging those duties.”
“Good. I’ll be there to see you do.”
“This is not—”
Hark raised his glass. “Your command status has always been thought of as strange, Gaunt. A colonel is a colonel
and a commissar is a commissar. Many have wondered how you could perform both those duties effectively when
the primary rationale of a commissar is to keep a check on the unit’s commander. For a while. Crusade command has
been considering appointing a commissar to the Tanith First to operate in conjunction with you. Events here have
made it a necessity.”
Gaunt pushed back his chair with a loud scrape and rose.
“Won’t you stay, Gaunt?” Lugo asked with a wry smile. “The main course is about to be served. Braised chelon
haunch in amasec and ghee.”
Gaunt nodded a curt salute, knowing that there was no point saying he had no appetite for the damned meal or the
company. “My apologies, lord general. I have an honour guard to arrange.”
SIX
ADVANCE GUARD
“What raised me will rest me. What brought me forth will take me back. In the high country of Hagia, I will
come home to sleep.”
—Saint Sabbat, epistles
The honour guard left the Doctrinopolis the next morning at daybreak, crossing the holy river and travelling west out
of the Pilgrim Gate onto the wide track of the Tembarong Road.
The convoy was almost three kilometres long from nose to tail: the entire Ghost regiment, carried in a line of fiftyeight
long-body trucks: twenty Pardus mainline battle tanks, fifteen munition Chimeras and four Hydra tractors, two
Trojans, eight scout Salamanders and three Salamander command variants. Their dust plume could be seen for miles
and the throaty rumble of their collective turbines rolled around the shallow hills of the rainwoods. A handful of
motorcycle outriders buzzed around their skirts, and in their midst travelled eight supply trucks laden with
provisions and spares and two heavy fuel tankers. The tankers would get them to Bhavnager, two or three days away,
where local fuel supplies would replenish them.
Gaunt rode in one of the command Salamanders near the head of the column. He had specifically chosen a vehicle
away from Hark, who travelled with the Pardus commander, Kleopas, in his command vehicle, one of the Pardus
regiment’s Conqueror-pattern battle tanks.
Gaunt stood up in the light tank’s open body and steadied himself on the armour cowling against the lurching it
made. The air was warm and sweet, though tinged with exhaust fumes. He had twenty-five hundred infantry in his
retinue, and the force of a mid-strength armour brigade. If this was his last chance to experience command, it was at
least a good one.
His head ached. The previous night he’d retired alone to his chambers in the Universitariat and drunk himself to
sleep over a stack of route maps.
Gaunt looked up into the blue as invisible shapes shrieked over, leaving contrails behind them that slowly
dissipated. For the first hour or two, they’d have air cover from the navy’s Lightnings.
He looked back, down the length of the massive vehicle column. Through the dust wake, he could see the
Doctrinopolis falling away behind them, a dimple of buildings rising up beyond the woodlands, hazed by the
distance. The flickering light storm of the Citadel was still visible.
He’d left many valuable men back there. The Ghosts wounded in the city fight, Corbec among them. The wounded
were due to be evacuated out in the next few days as part of the abandonment program. He was going to miss
Corbec. He was sadly struck by the notion that his last mission with the Ghosts would be conducted without the aid
of the bearded giant.
And he wondered what would happen to the Ghosts after his removal. He couldn’t imagine them operating under a
commander brought in from outside, and there was no way Corbec or Rawne would be promoted. The likelihood
was the Tanith First would simply cease to be once he had gone. There was no prospect for renewal. The troopers
would be transferred away into other regiments, perhaps as recon specialists, and that would be that.
His looming demise meant the demise of his beloved Tanith regiment too.
In one of the troop trucks, Tona Criid craned her head back to look at the distant city.
“They’ll be fine,” said Caffran softly. Tona sat back next to him in the bucking truckbed.
“You think?”
“I know. The servants of the Munitorium have cared for them so far, haven’t they?”
Tona Criid said nothing. At Vervunhive, thanks to circumstance, she had become the de facto mother of two
orphaned children. They now accompanied the Tanith First war machine as part of the sizeable and extended throng
of camp followers. Many of that group, the cooks and mechanics and munition crew, were travelling with them, but
many had been left behind for the evacuation. Children, wives, whores, musicians, entertainers, tailors, peddlers,
panders. There was no place for them on this stripped-down mission. They would leave Hagia on the transports and,
God-Emperor willing, would be reunited with their friends, and comrades and clients in the First later.
Tona took out the double-faced pendant she wore around her neck and looked wistfully at the faces of her children,
preserved in holoportraits and set in plastic. Yoncy and Dalin. The babe in arms and the fretful young boy.
“We’ll be with them again soon,” Caffran said. He thought of them as his too now. By extension, by the nature of
the relationship he had with Tona, Dalin called him Papa Caff. They were as close to an actual family unit as it was
possible to get in the Imperial Guard.
“Will we, though?” Tona asked.
“Old Gaunt would never lead us into harm, not if he thought he could get out of it,” Caffran said.
“The word is he’s finished,” said Larkin from nearby, overhearing. “Word is, we’re finished too. He’s a broken
man. Dead on the wire, so to speak. He’s going to be stripped of command and we’re going to be kicked around the
Imperial Guard in search of a home.”
“Are we now?” said Sergeant Kolea, moving down the track bay, catching Larkin’s words.
“S’what I heard,” said Larkin defensively.
“Then shut up until you know. We’re the fighting Tanith First, and we’ll be together until the end of time, right?”
Kolea’s words got a muted chorus of cheers from the troops in the track.
“Oh, you can do better than that! Remember Tanith! Remember Vervunhive!”
That got a far more resounding cheer.
“What’s that you’ve got, Criid?” Kolea asked as he shambled back down the track.
She showed him the pendant. “My kids, sir.”
Kolea looked into the pendant’s portraits for a curiously long time.
“Your kids?”
“Adopted them on Verghast, sir. Their parents were killed.”
“Good… good work, Criid. What are their names?”
“Yoncy and Dalin, sir.”
Kolea nodded and let go of the pendant. He walked to the end of the lurching track and looked out into the
rainwoods and irrigated field systems as they passed.
“Something the matter, sarge?” asked Trooper Fence, seeing the look on Kolea’s face.
“Nothing, nothing…” Kolea murmured.
They were his. The children in the pendant portrait were his children. Children he thought long gone and dead on
Verghast.
Some god-mocking irony had let them survive and be here. Here, with the Ghosts.
He felt sick and overjoyed all at the same time.
What could he say? What could he begin to say to Criid or Caffran or the kids?
Tears welled in his eyes. He looked out at the rainwoods sliding by and said nothing because there was nothing he
could say.
The Tembarong Road ran flat, wide and straight through the arable lowlands and rainwoods west of the
Doctrinopolis. The lowlands were formed by the broad basin of the holy river, which irrigated the fields and ditch
systems of the local farmers every year with its seasonal floods. There was a fresh, damp smell in the air and for a
lot of the way, the road followed the curving river bank.
Sergeant Mkoll ran ahead of the main convoy in one of the scout Salamanders with troopers Mkvenner and Bonin
and the driver. Mkoll had used Salamanders a couple of times before, but he was always impressed with the little
open-topped track-machines’ turn of speed. This one wore Pardus Armour insignia on its coat of blue-green mottle,
carried additional tarp-wrapped equipment slouched like papooses to the side sponsons, and had its pair of huge
UHF vox-antennas bent back over its body and tied off on the rear bars. The driver was a tall, adenoidal youth from
the Pardus Armour Aux who wore mirrored glare-goggles and drove like he wanted to impress the Tanith.
They dashed down the tree-lined road at close to sixty kph, waking out a fan tail of pink dust behind them off the
dry earth surface.
Mkvenner and Bonin dung on, grinning like fools and enjoying the ride. Mkoll checked his map book and made
notes against the edges of the glass-paper charts with a wax pencil.
Gaunt wanted to make the most of the Tembarong Road. He wanted a quick motorised dash for the first few days
as far as the sound highway lasted. Their speed was bound to drop once the trail entered the rainwoods, and after
that, as they wound their way up into the highlands things might get very slow altogether. There was no way of telling
what state the hill roads were in after the winter rains, and they were hoping to pass a great many tonnes of steel
along them.
As scout commander, Mkoll had special responsibilities for route-tasking and performance. He’d spent a while
talking to Captain Herodas the night before, assessing the mean road and off-road speeds the Pardus could manage.
He’d also spoken to Intendant Elthan, who ran the Munitorium’s freight motorpool. He and his drivers were crewing
the troop trucks and tankers. Mkoll had taken their conservative estimates of speed and mileage and revised them
down. Both Herodas and Elthan were imagining a trip of five or six days to travel the three hundred or so kilometres
to the Shrine-hold, roads permitting. Mkoll was looking at seven at least, maybe eight. And if it was eight, they’d
have barely a day to collect up what they’d come for and turn around for the home run, or they’d miss Lord General
Lugo’s eighteen-day evacuation deadline.
For now, the going was clear. The sky was still violet blue, and a combination of low altitude and the trees kept
the breezes down. It was hot.
At first they passed few people on the road except the occasional farmer, or a family group, and once or twice a
drover with a small train of livestock. The farmfolk had tried to maintain cultivation during the Infardi occupation,
but they had suffered, and Mkoll saw that great areas of the field-stocks and water beds were neglected and
overgrown. The few locals they saw turned to watch them pass and raised a hand of greeting or gratitude.
There was no sign of Infardi, many of whom had apparently fled out this way. The road and its environs showed
some sign of shelling and air damage, but it was old. The war had passed over this area briefly months ago, but most
of the conflict on Hagia had been focused on the dries.
Every once in a while, their passing engines scared flocks of gaudy-feathered fliers up out of trees and roosts. The
trees were lush green and roped with epiphytes, their trunks tall, curved and ridged. To Mkoll, raised in the
towering, temperate nalwood forests of Tanith, they seemed slight and decorative, like ornamental shrubs, despite the
fact that some of them were in excess of twenty metres tall.
At regular intervals through the trees, they caught racing glimpses of the sunlight on the river. Along one half
kilometre stretch where the highway ran right beside the water’s edge, they motored past a line of fishermen wading
out into the river stream, casting hand nets. The fishers all wore sun-hats woven from the local vindeaves.
The river dictated the way of life in the floodplains. The few roadside dwellings and small settlements they went
through were built up on wood-post stilts against the seasonal water rise. They also passed ornately carved and
brightly painted boxes raised three metres high on intricately carved single posts. These were occasional things,
appearing singly by the roadside or in small groups in glades set from the highway.
In the hour before noon, they ran through an abandoned village of overgrown, unkept stilt houses and came around
one of the road’s sharper bends, almost head-first into a herd of chelons and their drovers.
The Pardus driver gave out a little gasp, and hauled on the steering yoke, pulling the Salamander half up onto the
bushy verge, into the foliage and to an undignified halt. Unconcerned, the chelons, more than forty of them, lowed and
grunted as they shambled past. They were the biggest Mkoll had yet seen on Hagia, the great bell-domed shells of the
largest and most mature towering above their vehicle. The smallest and youngest had blue-black skins that gleamed
like oil and a fibrous dark patina to their shells, while the elders’ hides were paler and less lustrous, lined with
cracks and wrinkles, their massive shells limed almost white. A haze of dry, earthy animal smells wafted from them:
dung, fodder, saliva in huge quantities.
The three drovers ran over to the Salamander the moment it came to rest, waving their jiddi-sticks and exclaiming
in alarm. All three were tired, hungry men in the earth-tone robes of the agricultural caste.
Mkoll jumped down from the back step and raised his arms to calm their jabberings while Mkvenner directed the
Pardus driver as he reversed the light tank back out of the thorn breaks.
“It’s fine, no harm done,” Mkoll said. The drovers continued to look unhappy, and were busy making numerous
salutes to the Imperials.
“Please… If you feel like helping, tell us what’s ahead. On the road.” Mkoll pulled out his mapbook and showed
the route to the men, who passed it between themselves, contradicting each other’s remarks.
“It’s very good,” said one. “The road is very clear. We come down now this month from the high pastures. They
say the war is over. We come down in the hope that the markets will be open again.”
“Let’s hope so,” said Mkoll.
“People have been hiding in the woods, whole families, you know,” another said. His ancient weather-beaten skin
was as lined and gnarled as that of the chelons he drove. “They were afraid of the war. The war in the cities. But we
have heard the war is over and many people will come out of the woods now it is safe.”
Mkoll made a mental note. He had already suspected that a good proportion of the rural population might have
fled into the wilderness at the start of the occupation. As the honour guard pressed on, they might encounter many of
these people emerging back into the lowlands. With the threat of Infardi guerrillas all around, that made their job
harder. Hostiles and ambushes would be harder to pick out.
“What about the Infardi?” Mkoll asked.
“Oh, certainly,” said the first drover, cutting across the gabble of his companions. “Many, many Infardi now, on the
road and in the forest paths.”
“You’ve seen them?” Mkoll asked with sharp curiosity.
“Very often, or heard them, or seen the signs of their camps.”
“Many, you say?”
“Hundreds!”
“No, no… Thousands! More every day!”
Feth! Mkoll thought. A couple of pitched fights will slow us right down. The chelon-men might be exaggerating for
effect, but Mkoll doubted it. “My thanks to you all,” he said. “You might want to get your animals off the road for a
while. There’s a lot more of this stuff coming along,” he pointed to the Salamander, “and it’s a fair size bigger.”
The men all nodded and said they would. Mkoll was a little reassured. He wasn’t sure who would win a head-on
collision between a Conqueror and a mature bull chelon, but he was sure neither party would walk away smiling. He
thanked the drovers, assured them once more they had done him and his men no harm, and got back aboard the
Salamander.
“Sorry,” the driver grinned.
“Maybe a tad slower,” Mkoll replied. He pulled out the handset for the tank’s powerful vox set and sent a pulse
hail to the main convoy. Mkvenner was still standing in the road, gently and politely trying to refuse the honking
chelon calf that one of the drovers was offering him to make amends. “Alpha-AR to main advance, over.”
The speaker crackled. “Go ahead Alpha-AR.” Mkoll immediately recognised Gaunt’s voice.
“Picking up reports of Infardi activity up the road. Nothing solid yet, but you should be advised.”
“Understood, Alpha-AR. Where are you?”
“Just outside a village called Shamiam. I’m going ahead as far as Mukret. Best you send at least a couple more
advance recon units forward to me.”
“Copy that. I’ll send Beta-AR and Gamma-AR ahead. What’s your ETA at Mukret?”
“Another two to three hours, over.” Mukret was a medium-sized settlement on the river where they had planned to
make their first overnight stop.
“God-Emperor willing, we’ll see you there. Keep in contact.”
“Will do, sir. You should be aware that there are non-coms on the road. Families heading back out of hiding.
Caution advised.”
“Understood.”
“And about an hour ahead of you, there’s a big herd of livestock moving contra your flow. Lots of livestock and
three harmless herdsmen. They may be off road by the time you reach them, but be warned.”
“Understood.”
“Alpha-AR out.” Mkoll hung up the vox-mic and nodded at the waiting Pardus driver. “Okay,” he said.
The driver throttled the Salamander’s turbine and pointed her nose up the brown mud-cake of the highway.
A good fifteen kilometres back down the Tembarong Road, the honour guard convoy slowed and came to a halt. The
big khaki troop trucks bunched up, nose to nose and shuddered their exhaust stacks impatiently as they revved. A few
sounded their horns. The sun was high overhead and gleamed blindingly off the metalwork. To the left of the convoy,
the blue waters of the holy river crept by on the other side of a low levee.
Rawne got up in the back of his transport and climbed up on the guardrail so he could look out along the length of
the motorcade over the track’s cab. All he could see was stationary armour and laden tracks right down to the bend
in the road three hundred metres away.
He keyed his microbead as he glanced back down at Feygor.
“Get them up,” Rawne told his adjutant.
Feygor nodded and relayed the glib order to the fifty or so men in the transport cargo area. The Ghosts, many of
them sweating and without headgear, roused and readied their weapons, scanning the tree-line and field ditches to
the right of the road.
“One three,” said Rawne into his link. There was a lot of vox traffic. Questioning calls were running up and down
the convoy.
“Three, one,” replied Gaunt from up ahead. “One, what’s the story?”
“One of the munition Chimeras has thrown a track section. I’m going to wait fifteen minutes and see how the techs
do. Longer than that I’ll leave them behind.”
Rawne had seen the battered age of the worn Chimeras they’d been issued by the Munitorium motorpool. It would
take more than fething fifteen minutes to get one running in his opinion.
“Permission to recreationally disperse my men along the river edge”
“Granted, but watch the tree-line.”
Setting two men on point to cover the right-hand side of the road, Rawne ordered the rest of his troops off the
truck. Joking, pulling off jackets and boots, they jogged down to the river edge and started bathing their feet and
throwing handscoops of water on their faces. Other troop tracks pulled off the hardpan onto the levee shoulder and
disembarked their men. A Trojan tank tractor grumbled past edging up along the length of the stationary column from
the rear echelon to assist with the spot repairs.
Rawne wandered down the line of vehicles to where Sergeants Varl, Soric Baffels and Haller stood on the levee.
Soric was handing out stubby cigars from a waxed card box and Rawne took one. They all smoked for a while in
silence, watching the Ghosts, both Verghastite and Tanith, engage in impromptu water fights and games of kickball.
“Is it always like this, major?” Soric asked, jerking a thumb at the unmoving convoy. Rawne didn’t warm to
people much, but he liked the old man. He was a capable fighter and a good leader, but he wasn’t afraid to ask
questions that revealed his inexperience, which in Rawne’s book made him a good student and a promising officer.
“Always the same with moralised transportation. Breakdowns, bottlenecks, bad terrain. I always prefer to shift the
men by foot.”
“The Pardus equipment looks alright,” said Haller. “Well maintained and all.”
Rawne nodded. “It’s just the junk transports the Munitorium found for us. These trucks are as old as feth, and the
Chimeras…”
“I’m surprised they’ve made it this far,” said Varl. The sergeant gently windmilled his arm, nursing the cybernetic
shoulder joint the augmeticists had given him on Fortis Binary several years before. It still hurt him in humid
conditions. “And we’ll be fethed without them. Without the munitions they’re carrying, anyway.”
“We’re fethed anyway,” said Rawne. “We’re the Imperial fething Guard and it’s our lot in life to be fethed.”
Haller, Soric and Varl laughed darkly, but Baffels was silent. A stocky, bearded man with a blue claw tattoo under
one eye, Baffels had been promoted to sergeant after old Fols was killed at the battle for Veyveyr Gate. He still
wasn’t comfortable with command, and took his duties too seriously in Rawne’s opinion. Some common troopers —
Varl was a good example — were sergeants waiting to happen. Baffels was an honest footslogger who’d had
responsibility dumped on him because of his age, his dependability and his good favour with the men. Rawne knew
he was finding it hard. Gaunt had had a choice when it came to Fols’ replacement: Baffels or Milo, and he’d opted
for Baffels because to give the lead job to the youngest and greenest Ghost would have smacked of favouritism.
Gaunt had been wrong there, Rawne thought. He had no love for Milo, but he knew how capable he’d proved to be
and how dearly the men regarded him as a lucky totem. Gaunt should have gone with his gut — ability over
experience.
“Good smoke,” Varl told Soric, glancing appreciatively at the smouldering brown tube between his fingers.
“Corbec would have enjoyed them.”
“Finest Verghast leaf,” smiled Soric. “I have a private stock.”
“He should be here,” Baffels said, meaning the colonel. Then he glanced quickly at Rawne. “No offence, major!”
“None taken,” Rawne replied. Privately, Rawne was enjoying his new-found seniority. With both Corbec and that
upstart Captain Daur out of the picture, he was now the acting second of the regiment, with only the Pardus Major
Kleopas and the outsider Commissar Hark near to him in the taskforce pecking order. Mkoll was the Ghosts’ number
three officer for the duration, and Kolea had been given Daur’s Verghastite liaison tasks.
It still irked Rawne that he was forced to maintain the call-sign “three” to Gaunt’s “one”. Gaunt had explained it
was to preserve continuity of vox recognition, but Rawne felt he should be using Corbec’s “two” now.
What irked him more was the notion that Baffels was right. Corbec should be here. It went against Rawne’s
impulse, because he’d never liked Corbec that much either, but it was true. He felt it in his blood. What everyone
knew and none wanted to talk about was that this seemed likely to be the last mission of the Tanith First The lord
general had broken Gaunt, and Rawne would lead the applause when they came to march Gaunt away in disgrace,
but still…
This was the Ghosts’ final show.
And, feth him, Corbec should be here.
Mad Larkin sat, hot and edgy, in the rear of a vacated truck, his long-pattern las resting on the bodywork. Kolea had
left him and Cuu on point while the others ran to the river to cool down and blow off steam.
Larkin searched the far side of the road with his usual obsessive methods, sectioning the tree-line and the expanse
of water-field by eye and then scanning each section in turn sequentially.Thorough, careful, faultless.
Each movement made him tense, but each movement turned out to be flapping forkbills or scampering spider-rats
or even just the breeze-sway of the fronded leaves.
He passed the time with target practice, searching out a target and then following it through his scope’s crosshairs.
The red-crested forkbills were fine enough, but they were an easy target because of their white plumage and size.
The spider-rats were better creepy eight-limbed mammals the size of Larkin’s hand that jinked up and down the tree
trunks in skittering stop-start trajectories so fast they made a sport out of it.
“What you up to?”
Larkin looked round and up into Trooper Cuu’s arrogant eyes.
“Just… spotting,” Larkin said. He didn’t like Cuu at all. Cuu made him nervous. People called Larkin mad, but he
wasn’t mad like Cuu. Cuu was a cold killer. A psycho. He was covered in gang tatts and had a long scar that bisected
his narrow face.
Cuu folded his lean limbs down next to Larkin. Larkin thought of himself as thin and small amongst the Ghosts but
Cuu was smaller. There was, however, a suggestion of the most formidable energy in his wiry frame.
“You could hit them?” he asked.
“What?”
“The white birds with the stupid beaks?”
“Yeah, easy. I was hunting the rats.”
“What rats?”
Larkin pointed. “Those things. Creepy fething bugs.”
“Oh yeah. Didn’t see them before. Sharp eyes you got. Sharp as sharp.”
“Goes with the territory,” Larkin said, patting his sniper weapon.
“Sure it does. Sure as sure.” Cuu reached into his pocket and produced a couple of hand-rolled white smokes
which he offered in a vee to Larkin.
“No thanks.”
Cuu put one away and lit the other, drawing deep. Larkin could smell the scent of obscura. He’d used it
occasionally back on Tanith, but it was one of Gaunt’s banned substances. Feth, but it smelled strong.
“Colonel-commissar’U have you for that stuff,” he said. Cuu grinned and exhaled ostentatiously. “Gaunt don’t
frighten me,” he said. “You sure you won’t…?”
“No thanks.”
“Those gakking white birds,” Cuu said after a long interval. “You reckon you could hit them easy?”
“Yeah.”
“I’m betting they could be good in the pot. Bulk up standard rations, a few of them.”
It was a decent enough idea. Larkin keyed his link. “Three, this is Larks. Cuu and I are going off the track to nab a
few waterbirds for eating. Okay with you?”
“Good idea. I’ll advise the convoy you’re going to be shooting. Bag one for me.”
Larkin and Cuu dropped off the side of the truck and wandered across the road. They slithered down the field
embankment into an irrigation ditch where the watery mud sloshed up around their calves. Forkbills warbled and
clacked in the cycad grove ahead. Larkin could already see the telltale dots of white amongst the dark green foliage.
Skeeter flies buzzed around them, and sap-wasps droned over their heads. Larkin slid his sound suppressor out of
his uniform’s thigh pouch and carefully screwed it onto the muzzle of his long-las.
They came up around a clump of fallen palms and Larkin nestled down in the exposed root system to take aim. He
scope-chased a spider-rat up and down a tree bole for a moment to get his eye in and then settled on a plump forkbill.
The trick wasn’t to hit it. The trick was to knock its head off. A las-round would explode a forkbill into feathers
and mush if it hit the body, like taking a man out by jamming a tube-charge down his waistband. Shoot the inedible
head off and you’d have a ready-to-pluck carcass.
Larkin squared up, shook his head and shoulders out and fired. There was a slight flash and virtually no noise. The
forkbill, now with nothing but a scorched ring of flesh and feathers where its head should have joined on, dropped
off into the shallow water.
In short order, Larkin pinked off five more. He and Cuu sloshed out to gather them up, hooking them by the webbed
feet into their belts.
“You’re gakking good,” Cuu said.
“Thanks.”
“That’s a hell of a gun.”
“Sniper variant long-las. My very best friend.”
Cuu nodded. “I believe that. You mind if I take a try?”
Cuu held his hand out and Larkin reluctantly handed the long-las to him, taking Cuu’s standard lasrifle in return.
Cuu grinned at the new toy, and eased the nalwood stock against his shoulder.
“Nice,” he sighed. “Nice as nice.”
He fired suddenly and a forkbill exploded in a mass of white feathers and blood. “Not bad, but—”
Cuu ignored Larkin and fired again. And again. And again. Three more forkbills detonated off their perches.
“We can’t cook them if you hit them square,” Larkin said.
“I know. We’ve got enough for eating now. This is just fun.”
Larkin wanted to complain, but Cuu swung the long-las round quick fare and destroyed two more birds. The water
under the trees was thick with blood stains and floating white feathers.
“That’s enough,” said Larkin.
Cuu shook his head, and aimed again. He’d switched the long-las to rapid fire and when he pulled the trigger,
pulse after pulse whined into the canopy.
Larkin was alarmed. Alarmed at the misuse of his beloved weapon, alarmed at Cuu’s psychopathic glee…
…and most of all, alarmed at the way Cuu’s wildfire blasted and crisped a half dozen spider-rats off the
surrounding tree trunks. Not a shot was wasted or went wide. Skittering targets even he’d have to think twice about
hitting were reduced to seared, blood-leaking impacts on the trees.
Cuu handed the weapon back to Larkin.
“Nice gun,” said Cuu, and turned back to rejoin the road.
Larkin hurried after him. He shivered despite the sun’s heat that baked down over the highway. Cold killer. Larkin
knew he’d be watching his back from now on.
At the front end of the immobile convoy, Gaunt, Kleopas and Herodas stood watching the tech-priests and engineers
of the Pardus regiment as they struggled to retrack the defective Chimera. A workteam of Pardus and Tanith
personnel had already unloaded the armoured transport by hand to reduce its payload weight. The Trojan throbbed
and idled nearby like a watchful parent.
Gaunt glanced at his chronometer. “Another ten minutes and we’ll move on regardless.”
“I might object sir,” Kleopas ventured. “This unit was carrying shells for the Conquerors.” He gestured to the
massive stack of munitions the workteam had removed from the Chimera to get it upright. “We can’t just leave this
stuff.”
“We can if we have to,” said Gaunt.
“If this was a payload of lasgun powercells, you’d say different.”
“You’re right,” Gaunt nodded to Kleopas. “But we’re on the tightest of clocks, major. I’ll give them twenty
minutes. But only twenty.”
Captain Herodas moved away to shout encouraging orders at the engineer teams.
Gaunt pulled out a silver hip flask. It was engraved with the name “Delane Oktar”. He offered it to Kleopas.
“Thank you, colonel-commissar, no. A little early in the day for me.”
Gaunt shrugged and took a swig. He was screwing up the cap when a voice from behind them said, “I hear
shooting.”
Gaunt and Kleopas looked around at Commissar Hark as he approached them.
“Just a little authorised foraging,” Gaunt told him.
“Do the squad leaders know? It might trigger a panic.”
“They know. I told them. Regulation 11-0-119 gamma.”
Hark made an open-handed shrug. “You don’t need to cite it to me, colonel. I believe you.”
“Good. Major Kleopas… perhaps you’d explain to the commissar here what is happening. In intricate detail.”
Kleopas glared at Gaunt and then turned to smile at Hark. “We’re retracking the Chimera, sir, and that involves a
heavy lifter as you can see…”
Gaunt slipped away, removing himself from the commissar’s presence. He walked back down the line of vehicles,
taking another swig from the flask.
Hark watched him go. “What are your thoughts on the legendary colonel-commissar?” he asked Kleopas,
interrupting a lecture on mechanised track repair.
“He’s as sound a commander as ever I knew. Lives for his men. Don’t ask me again, sir. I won’t have my words
added to any official report of censure.”
“Don’t worry, Kleopas,” said Hark. “Gaunt’s damned any way you look at it. Lord General Lugo has him in his
sights. I was just making conversation.”
Gaunt walked back a hundred metres and found Medic Curth and her orderlies sitting in the shade cast by their
transport.
Curth got up. “Sir?”
“Everything fine here?” Gaunt asked. He was unhappy with the fact that Dorden had stayed behind in the
Doctrinopolis to see to the wounded. Curth was a fine medic, but he wasn’t used to her being in charge of the
taskforce’s surgical team. Dorden had always been his chief medic, since the foundation of the Ghosts. Curth would
take a little getting used to.
“Everything’s fine,” she said, her smile as appealing as her heart-shaped face.
“Good,” said Gaunt. “Good.” He took another swig.
“Any of that going spare?” Curth asked.
Surprised, he turned and handed her the flask. She took a hefty slug.
“I didn’t think you’d approve.”
“This waiting makes me nervous,” she said, wiping her mouth and handing the hip flask back to Gaunt. “Me too,”
Gaunt said.
“Anyway,” said Curth. “Trust me. It’s medicinal.”
Alpha-AR pulled into Mukret in the late afternoon. The Salamander rolled down to a crawl and Mkoll, Mkvenner
and Bonin leapt out, lasguns raised, trailing the light tank down the main highway as it passed through the jumble of
stilt houses and raised halls. A slight breeze had picked up with the approach of evening, and it lifted dust and leaflitter
across the bright sunlit road and the dark spaces of shadow between and under the dwellings.
The sun itself, big and yellowing, shone sideways through a stiff break of palms and cypresses towards the river.
The township was deserted. Doors flapped open and epiphytic creepers roiled around window frames and stack
posts. There was broken crockery on the house-walks, and litters of ragged clothing in the gutters. At the far end of
the town sat long, brick and tile smokehouses. Mukret’s main industry was the smoke-drying of fish and meats. The
Tanith could still pick out the tangy background scent of woodsmoke in the air.
Behind the rolling tank, the three scouts prowled forward, lasguns held in loose, fluid grips. Bonin swung and
aimed abruptly as forkbills mobbed out of a tree.
The Salamander rumbled.
Mkoll moved ahead and switched Bonin left down a jetty walk to the river itself with a coded gesture.
Ahead, something stirred. It was a chelon, an immature calf, wandering out into the main road, dragging its reins in
the dust. A short-form clutch saddle was lashed to its back.
It wandered past Mkoll and Mkvenner, trailing its bridle. Mkoll could hear sporadic knocking now. Mkoll
signalled for Mkvenner to hold back as cover and walked forward towards the noise.
An old man, skinny and gnarled, was hammering panels into place on an old and ransacked stilt-chapel. It looked
like he was trying to board up broken windows using only a length of tree-limb as a hammer.
He was dressed in blue silk robes. Ayatani, Mkoll realised. The local priesthood.
“Father!”
The old man turned and lowered his tree-limb. He was bald, but had a triumphantly long, tapering white beard. It
was so long, in fact, that he’d tucked it over his shoulder to keep it out of the way.
“Not now,” he said in a crotchety tone, “I’m busy. This holy shrine won’t just repair itself.”
“Maybe I can help you?”
The old man clambered back down to the roadway and faced Mkoll. “I don’t know. You’re a man with a gun…
and a tank, it appears. You may be intending to kill me and steal my chelon which, personally speaking, I would not
find helpful. Are you a murderer?”
“I’m a member of the Imperial liberation force,” Mkoll replied, looking the old man up and down.
“Really? Well now…” the old man mused, using the up of his long beard to mop his face.
“What’s your name?”
“Ayatani Zweil,” said the old man. “And yours?”
“Scout Sergeant Mkoll.”
“Scout Sergeant Mkoll, eh? Very impressive. Well, Scout Sergeant Mkoll, the Ershul have fouled this shrine, this
sacred house of our thrice-beloved saint, and I intend to rebuild it stick by stick. If you assist me, I will be grateful.
And I’m sure the saint will be too. In her way.”
“Father, we’re heading west. I need to know if you’ve seen any Infardi on the road.”
“Of course I have. Hundreds of them.”
Mkoll reached for his vox link but the old man stopped him.
“Infardi I’ve seen plenty of. Pilgrims. Flocking back to the Doctrinopolis. Yes, yes… plenty of Infardi. But no
Ershul.”
“I’m confused.”
The ayatani gestured up and down the sunlit road through Mukret. “Do you know what you’re standing on?”
“The Tembarong Road,” said Mkoll.
“Also known in the old texts of Irimrita as the Ayolta Amad Infardiri, which literally means the ‘approved route of
Infardi procession’ or more colloquially the Pilgrim’s Way. The road may go to Tembarong. That way. Eventually.
Who wants to go there? A dull little city where the women have fat legs. But that way—” He pointed the direction
Mkoll had appeared from.
“In that direction, pilgrims travel. To the shrines of the Doctrinopolis Citadel. To the Tempelum Infarfarid Sabbat.
To a hundred places of devotion. They have done for many hundreds of years. It is a pilgrim’s way. And our name for
pilgrims is ‘Infardi’. That is its proper sense and I use it as such.”
Mkoll coughed politely. “So when you say Infardi you mean real pilgrims?”
“Yes.”
“Coming this way?”
“Positively flocking, Scout Sergeant Mkoll. The Doctrinopolis is open again, so they come to give thanks. And
they come to prostrate themselves before the desecrated Citadel.”
“You’re not referring to soldiers of the enemy then?”
“They stole the name Infardi. I won’t let them have it! I won’t! If they want a name, let them be Ershul!”
“Ershul?”
“It is a word from the Ylath, the herdsman dialect. It refers to a chelon that consumes its own dung or the dung of
others.”
“And have you seen… uhm… Ershul? On your travels?”
“No.”
“I see.”
“But I’ve heard them.” Zweil suddenly took Mkoll by the arm and pointed him west, over the roofscape of Mukret,
towards the distant edges of the rainwoods, which were becoming hazed and misty in the late afternoon. A dark stain
of stormclouds was gathering over the neighbouring hills.
“Up there, Scout Sergeant Mkoll. Beyond Bhavnager, in the Sacred Hills. They lurk, they prowl, they wait.”
Mkoll involuntarily wanted to pull away from the old man’s tight grip but it was strangely reassuring. It reminded
him of the way Archdeacon Mkere used to steer him to the lectern to read the lesson at church school back on Tanith,
years ago.
“Are you a devout man, Scout Sergeant Mkoll?”
“I hope I am, father. I believe the Emperor is god in flesh, and I live to serve him in peace and war.”
“That’s good, that’s good. Contact your fellows. Tell them to expect trouble on their pilgrimage.”
Twenty kilometres east, the main convoy was moving again. The munitions Chimera had been repaired well enough
for the time being, though Intendant Elthan had warned Gaunt it would need a proper overhaul during the night rest.
They were making good time again. Gaunt sat in the open cab of his command Salamander, reviewing the charts
and hoping they’d make it to Mukret before nightfall. Mkoll had just checked in. Alpha-AR had reached Mukret and
found it deserted, though the dour scout had repeated his warning about Infardi sightings.
Gaunt put the maps aside and turned to his battered, annotated copy of Saint Sabbat’s gospel, as he had done many
times that day. Trying to read the text in the jolting Salamander made his head hurt, but he persisted. He flicked
through to the most recent of the paper place-markers he’d left. The mid-section, the Psalms of Sabbat. Virtually
impenetrable, their language both antique and mysteriously coded with symbols. He could read everything and
nothing into them as meaning, but nothing was all he took away.
Except that it was the most beautiful religious verse he’d ever read. Warmaster Slaydo had thought so too. It was
from him that Gaunt had got his love of the Sabbat psalms. His hands lowered the book to his knees as he looked up
and remembered Slaydo for a moment.
He felt a lurch as the tank slowed suddenly, and stood up to look. His mount was third from the front of the
convoy, and the two scout Salamanders ahead had dropped speed sharply. Red brake lights came on behind their
metal grilles, stark and bright in the twilight.
A large herd of massive chelons was coming towards them, driven by several beige-robed peasants. It was half
blocking the road. The convoy leaders were being forced to pull into tight single file against the riverwards edge of
the highway.
Mkoll had warned him about this. Lots of livestock and three harmless herdsmen, he’d said, though he’d seemed
certain they’d be off the road before the convoy met them.
“One to convoy elements,” Gaunt said into his vox on the all-channel band. “Drop your speed and pull over to the
extreme left. We’ve got livestock on the road. Show courtesy and pass well clear of them.”
The drivers and crews snapped back responses over the link. The convoy slowed to a crawl and began to creep
along past the straggled line of lowing, shambling beasts. Gaunt cursed this fresh delay. It would be a good ten
minutes until they were clear of the obstruction.
He looked out at the big shell-backs as they went by close enough to lean out and touch. Their animal odour was
strong and earthy, and Gaunt could hear the creak of their leathery armour skin and the gurgle of their multichambered
stomachs. They broke noxious wind, or groaned and snuffled. Blunt muzzles chewed regurgitated cuds.
He saw the drovers too. Large labourers in the coarse off-white robes of the agrarian caste, urging the beasts on with
taps of their jiddi-sticks, their hoods and face-veils pulled up against the dust. A few nodded apologetically to him
as they passed. Most didn’t spare the Imperials a look. Religious war and sacred desecration ravages their world
and for them, it’s business as usual, thought Gaunt. Some lives in this lethal galaxy were enviably simple…
Lots of livestock and three harmless herdsmen. He remembered Mkoll’s report with abrupt clarity. Three
harmless herdsmen.
Now he was level with them, he counted at least nine. “One! This is one! Be advised, this could be—” His words
were cut off by the bang-shriek of a shoulder-launched missile. Two vehicles back, a command Salamander slewed
wildly and vomited a fierce cone of flame and debris out of its crew-space. Metal fragments rained down out of the
air, tinking off his own vehicle’s bodywork.
The vox-link went mad. Gaunt could hear sustained bursts of las-fire and auto weapons. Herdsmen, suddenly
several dozen in number, were surging out from the cover of their agitated animals. They had weapons. As their
robes fell away, he saw body art and green silk.
He grabbed his bolt pistol.
The Infardi were all over them.
SEVEN
DEATH ON THE ROAD
“Let me rest, now the battle’s done.”
—Imperial Guard song
His drover’s disguise flapping about him, an Infardi gunman clambered up the mudguard of the command Salamander
and raised his autopistol, a yowl of rabid triumph issuing from his scabby lips. He stank of fermented fruit liquor and
his eyes were wild-white with intoxicated frenzy.
Gaunt’s bolt round hit him point-blank in the right cheek and disintegrated his head in a puff of liquidised tissue.
“One to honour guard units! Infardi ambush to the right! Turn and repel!”
Gaunt could hear further missile impacts and lots of small arms lire. The chelons, viced in by the road edge on one
side and the Imperial armour on the other, were whinnying with agitation and banging the edges of their shells up
against vehicle hulls. “Turn us! Turn us around!” Gaunt yelled at his driver.
“No room, sir!” the Pardus replied desperately. A brace of hard-slug shots sparked and danced off the
Salamander’s cowling.
“Damn it!” Gaunt bellowed. He rose in the back of the tank and fired into the charging enemy, killing one Infardi
and crippling a mature chelon. The beast shrieked and slumped over, crushing two more of the ambushers before
rolling hard into the Chimera behind. It began to writhe, baying, shoving the tank into the verge.
Gaunt swore and grabbed the firing grips of the pintle-mounted storm bolter. Infardi were appearing in the road
ahead and he raked the hardpan, dropping several. Some had swarmed over the leading scout tank ahead and were
murdering the crew. The vehicle slewed to a drunken, sidelong halt.
A tank round roared off close behind him. He heard the hot detonation of superheating gas, the grinding clank of
the recoiling weapon, the whoosh of the shell. It fell in the ditchfield to the right of the road and kicked up a huge
spout of liquid muck. More tanks now fired their main guns, and turret-mounted bolters chattered and sprayed.
Another big chelon, hit dead centre by a tank shell, exploded wholesale and a big, stinking cloud of blood mist and
intestinal gas billowed down the convoy.
Gaunt knew they had the upper hand in terms of strength, but the ambushers had been canny. They’d slowed the
convoy down with the livestock and pinned it against the road wall so it couldn’t manoeuvre.
He fired the weapon mount again, chopping through an Infardi running up to position a missile launcher. Dead
fingers convulsed anyway and the missile fired and immediately dropped, blowing a deep crater in the road.
Something grabbed Gaunt from behind and pulled him off the storm bolter. He fell back into the tank’s crewbay,
kicking and fighting for his life.
The first third of the honour guard convoy was under hard assault, jammed and slowed to such an extent by the herd
that the trailing portion of the convoy, straggled back to a more than four kilometre spread now, couldn’t move up to
successfully support.
Larkin found himself next to Cuu, firing down from their troop truck body into the weeds as Infardi swarmed up
out of the waterline, shooting as they came. Cuu was giggling gleefully as he killed. An anti-tank rocket wailed over
their heads, and las-fire exploded around them, killing a trooper nearby and blowing out the windows of the truck
cab.
“Disperse! Engage!” Sergeant Kolea yelled, and the Tanith leapt from the trucks en masse, charging the attackers
with fixed bayonets and blazing las-fire.
Criid and Caffran charged together, hitting the first of the Infardi hand to hand, clubbing and gutting them. Caffran
dropped for a wide shot that sent another ambusher tumbling back down the ditch into the field. Criid fell, got up,
and laced las-blasts into the shins of the Infardi stampeding towards them. A Pardus tank roared nearby, blindly
shelling the herd.
Rawne’s track, further down the line, was mobbed by Infardi. The cargo bed rocked as bodies piled onto it.
Rawne fired his lasgun into the thick press, and saw Feygor rip an enemy’s throat out with his silver Tanith knife.
The darkening evening air was crisscrossed by painfully bright las-fire. A second later, gusting flames surged down
the roadside gulley. From Varl’s track, Trooper Brostin was washing the roadline with bursts from his flamer.
Major Kleopas tried to turn his Conqueror, but a massive chelon, bucking and hooting, slammed into his bull-bars
and shunted the entire tank around. For a full five seconds, the tank’s racing tracks dragged at thin air as the weight of
the bull chelon drove its nose into the road.
Then the tracks grabbed purchase again. Kleopas’ tank lurched forward.
“Ram it!” Kleopas ordered.
“Sir?”
“Screw you! Full power! Ram it!” Kleopas barked down at his driver.
The Conqueror battle tank, named Heart of Destruction according to the hand-painted hull logo, scrambled
sideways in a vast spray of dust and then drove its bulldozer blade into the legs of the big bull chelon. Kleopas’ tank
maimed the animal and rammed it off the highway, though the Conqueror dented its hull plating against the chelon’s
shell in the process.
Squealing, the chelon fell down into the waterfield ditch and rolled over on its back, squashing eight Infardi
troopers in the irrigation gulley.
The Heart of Destruction dipped off the roadside and down into the waterbed, tracks churning. As his main
gunner and gun layer pumped shells into the breaks of trees beyond the road, Kleopas manned the bolter hardpoint
and blasted tracer shots across the irrigation ditches.
His manoeuvre began to break the deadlock. Three tanks followed him through the gap he’d cut and rattled round
into the tree-line off the road, wasting the dug-in Infardi with turret bolters and flamers.
In the closed track carrying the medical supplies, Ana Curth flinched as stray shots punched through the hardskin
and her racks of bottled pharmaceuticals. Glass debris spat in all directions. Lesp stumbled to his knees, a dark line
of blood welling across his cheek from a sliver of flying glass.
Two Infardi clambered up the rear gate of the track. Curth kicked one away with a boot in the face, and then
dragged out a laspistol Soric had given her and fired twice. The second Infardi attacker fell off the track.
Curth turned to see if Lesp was all right. She saw the alarm in his face, half-heard the warning shout coming from
his mouth, and then felt herself grabbed and pulled bodily out of the track.
Her world spun. Terror viced her. She was jerked upside down, held carelessly by the legs, her face in the dirt.
The Infardi were all over her, clawing and tearing. She could smell their wretched sweat-stink. All she could see
was a jumble of green silk and tattooed flesh.
There was a sudden glare of hard blue light and a sizzling sound. Hot liquid sprayed over her, and she realised,
with professional detachment, that it was blood. She swung as the grip on her half-released.
The blur of blue light carved the air again and something yelped. She collapsed onto the road, flat on her belly,
and rolled up in time to see Ibram Gaunt raking his glowing power sword around in an expert figure-six swing that
felled an Infardi like a tree. Gaunt had lost his cap and his clothes were torn. There was an unnerving look of
unquenchable fury in his eyes. He wielded the sacred blade of her home-hive two-handed now, like a champion of
antique myth. Dismembered bodies piled around him and the gritty sand of the road was soaked with gore for metres
in every direction.
A hero, she thought abruptly, realising it truly in her mind for the first time. Damn Lugo and his disdain! This man
is an Imperial hero!
Lesp, his face running with blood, appeared suddenly behind the commissar in the back gatehatch of the medical
truck and began laying down support fire with his lasgun. Gaunt staked his power sword tip-down in the road and
knelt next to it, scooping up a fallen Infardi lasrifle. His short, clipped bursts of fire joined Lesp’s, stinging across
the road and into the mob of Infardi. Green-clad bodies tumbled onto the road or slithered back down the trench into
the field.
Curth scrambled over to Gaunt on her hands and knees. Once she was safely beside him, she too knelt and began
firing with a purloined Infardi weapon. She had none of the Commissar’s trained skill with an assault las, nor as
much as Trooper Lesp, but she made a good account of herself with the unfamiliar weapon nevertheless. Gaunt, grim
and driven, handled his firing pattern with an assured expertise that would have shamed even a well-drilled
infantryman.
“You didn’t scream,” Gaunt said to her suddenly, firing steadily. “What?”
“You didn’t scream when they grabbed you.”
“And that’s good — why?”
“Waste of energy, of dignity. If they’d killed you, they’d have taken no satisfaction in it.”
“Oh,” she said, nonplussed, not sure if she should be flattered.
“Never give the enemy anything, Ana. They take what they take and that’s more than enough as it is.”
“Live by that do you?” she asked sourly, twitching off another burst of unsteady but enthusiastic shots.
“Yes,” he replied, as if he was surprised she should ask. Sensing that, she felt surprised too. At herself, for her
own stupidity. It was obvious and she’d known it all along if she’d but recognised it. That was Gaunt’s way. Gaunt
the Imperial hero. Give nothing. Never. Ever. Never let your guard down, never allow the enemy the slightest edge.
Stay firm and die hard. Nothing else would do.
It wasn’t just the commissar in him. It was the warrior, Curth realised. It was Gaunt’s fundamental philosophy. It
had brought him here and would carry him on to whatever death, kind or cruel, the fates had in store for him. It made
him what he was: the relentless soldier, the celebrated leader, the terrifying slayer.
She felt unbearably sad for him and in awe of him all in the same moment.
Ana Curth had heard about the disgrace awaiting Gaunt at the end of this mission. That made her saddest of all.
She realised he was going to be absolutely true to his duty and his calling right to the end, no matter the shadow of
dishonour hanging over him. He would not falter.
Gaunt would be Gaunt until death claimed him.
Fifty metres away, Captain Herodas fell out of a burning Salamander a few moments before a second anti-tank rocket
whooshed out of the roadside trees and blew it apart.
Almost immediately, a hard-slug tore through his left knee and threw him into the dust. He blacked out in pain for a
second and then fought back, trying to crawl. The Pardus trooper next to him was face down in a pool of blood.
“Lezink! Lezink!”
Herodas tried to rum the man over, but the limbs were loose and the body was hollow and empty. Herodas looked
down and saw the horror of blown-out meat and bone shards that was all that remained of his own leg joint. Lasshots
zinged over his head. He reached for his pistol but his holster was flapping open.
There were tears in his eyes. The dull pain was rising to overwhelm him. From all around came the sounds of
screaming, shooting, killing.
The ground shook. Herodas looked up in disbelief at the cow chelon that was stampeding towards him from the
trapped, terrified herd. It was a third the size of the big bulls, but still weighed in at over two tonnes.
He closed his eyes tight and braced for the bone-splintering impact that was about to come.
A thin beam of hot red energy stabbed across the road and hit the hurtling brute with such force it was blown
sideways off its feet. The shot disintegrated a huge hole in the chelon and left it a smouldering husk, dripping fatty
mush.
Plasma fire! thought Herodas. Thrice-damned gods! That was plasma fire!
He saw the stocky shape of Commissar Hark striding down the roadway, dark in the rising dust and evening light,
his long coat rippling around him. Hark was calling out commands and pointing as he directed the units of sprinting
Tanith infantry down the road and into the enemy flank. He held an ancient plasma pistol in his right hand.
Hark halted and sent three more troop units on past him as they ran up, forking them wide to disperse them into the
roadside gutter. He turned and waved two Pardus Conquerors forward off the road with quick, confident gestures.
Then he spun round abruptly, brought up his weapon, and cremated an Infardi who had risen from the roadside
weeds with a rifle.
Hark crossed to Herodas.
“Stay still, help’s on the way.”
“Get me up, and I’ll fight!” Herodas complained.
Hark smiled. “Your courage does you credit captain, but believe me, you’re not going anywhere but to a medic cot
Your leg’s a mess. Stay still.”
He turned and fired his plasma gun into the trees again at a target Herodas couldn’t even see.
“They’re all over us,” Herodas said.
“No, they’re breaking. We’ve got them running,” Hark told him, bolstering his plasma gun and kneeling down to
apply a tourniquet to Herodas’ thigh.
“The fight’s out of them,” he reassured the captain, but Herodas had blacked out again.
The fight was indeed out of them. Overmatched and repulsed, leaving two-thirds of their number dead, the Infardi
ambushers fled away into the off-road woodland, hunted by the Pardus shelling and the staccato thrash of the Hydra
batteries.
The front section of the convoy was a mess: two scout Salamanders and a command Salamander ruined and
burning, a supply Chimera overturned and blown out, two trucks ablaze. Twenty-two Pardus dead, fifteen Ghosts, six
Munitorium crewmen. Six Ghosts and three Pardus severely injured and over eighty light wounds sustained by
various personnel.
Listening to the roll call of deaths and injuries on his microbead, Gaunt strode back to his vehicle, retrieving his
cap, and exchanging his torn storm coat for a short leather bomber jacket.
He sat on the rear fender of his Salamander as sweating troopers carried out the bodies of his driver and
navigator.
Smoke and blood-fumes lingered over the scene. Infardi bodies were strewn everywhere, as well as the stricken
chelon, some dead, some mortally hurt. The rest of the herd had broken into the waterfield and were disappearing as
they moved away in the diminishing light. Gaunt could hear the snap of las-fire and the grumble of tanks as they
cleared the low lying woods.
During the course of the fight, the sun had gone down, and the sky was now a smooth, luminous violet. Night
breezes came up from the river and shivered the trees. They were badly behind schedule, a long way short of the
planned night stop. It would be well after full dark before they reached Mukret now.
Gaunt heard someone approach and looked up. It was Intendant Elthan, wearing the stiff grey robes of the
Munitorium, and a look of disdain.
“This is unacceptable, colonel-commissar,” he said briefly.
“What is?”
“The losses, the attack.”
“I’m afraid I don’t follow you, intendant. War isn’t ‘unacceptable’. It’s dirty and tragic and terrifying and often
senseless, but it’s also a fact of life.”
“This attack!” Elthan hissed, his lips tight around his yellowed teeth. “You were warned! Your scout detail
warned you of the enemy presence. I heard it myself on the vox-link. This should never have happened!”
“What are you suggesting, intendant? That I’m somehow culpable for these deaths?”
“That is exactly what I’m suggesting! You ignored your recon advice. You pressed on—”
“That’s enough,” said Gaunt, getting to his feet. “I’m prepared to put your comments down to shock and
inexperience. We should just forget this exchange happened.”
“I will not!” Elthan relied. “We all know the mess you made of the Doctrinopolis liberation. That shoddy
leadership has cost you your career! And now you—”
“Menazoid Epsilon. Fortis Binary. Vervunhive. Monthax. Sapiencia. Nacedon.”
They both looked around. Hark stood watching them.
“Other examples of shoddy leadership, in your opinion, intendant?”
Elthan went a little red around the edges and then blustered on. “I expect your support on this, commissar! Are you
not here for the express purpose of disciplining and supervising this… this broken man?”
“I am here to discharge the duties of an Imperial commissar,” said Hark simply.
“You heard the recon reports!”
“I did,” said Hark. “We were warned of enemy activity. We moved judiciously and took precautions. Despite that,
they surprised us. It’s called an ambush. It happens in war. It’s part of the risk you take in a military action.”
“Are you siding with him?” asked Elthan.
“I’m remaining neutral and objective. I’m pointing out that even the best commander must expect attacks and
losses. I’m suggesting you return to your vehicle and supervise the resumption of this convoy.”
“I don’t—”
“No, you don’t understand. Because you are not a soldier, intendant. We have a saying on my home world:
sometimes you get the carniv and sometimes the carniv gets you.”
Elthan turned disdainfully and stalked away. Down the road, a trio of Pardus tanks had lowered their dozer blades
and were ploughing the chelon carcasses off the thoroughfare. Headlamps gleamed like little full moons in the dusk.
“What’s the matter?” Hark asked Gaunt. “You look… I don’t know… startled, I suppose.”
Gaunt shook his head and didn’t reply. In truth, he was startled at the way Hark had come to his defence. Elthan
had been talking a lot of crap, but he’d been spot on about Hark’s purpose here. It was common knowledge. Hark
himself had been brutally matter-of-fact about it from the outset. He was Lugo’s punisher, here to oversee the end of
Gaunt’s command. Gaunt knew little of Hark’s background or past career, but the same was clearly not true in
reverse. Hark had casually reeled off the most notable actions of the Ghosts under Gaunt from memory. And he’d
spoken with what seemed genuine admiration.
“Have you made a particular study of my career, Hark?”
“Of course. I have been appointed to serve the Tanith First as commissar. I’d be failing in that duty if I did not
thoroughly acquaint myself with its history and operations. Wouldn’t I?”
“And what did you learn from that study?”
“That, despite a history of clashes with the upper echelons of command, you have a notable service record. Hagia
is your first true failure, but it is a failure of such magnitude that it threatens to eclipse all you have done before.”
“Really? Do you really believe I deserve sole blame for the disaster in the Doctrinopolis?”
“Lord General Lugo is a lord general, Gaunt. That is the most complete answer I can give you.”
Gaunt nodded with an unfriendly smile. “There is justice beyond rank, Hark. Slaydo believed that.”
“Rest his good soul, the Emperor protects. But Macaroth is Warmaster now.”
The candid honesty of the response struck Gaunt. For the first time, he felt something other than venom towards
Commissar Viktor Hark. To be part of the Imperial Guard was to be part of a complex system of obedience, loyalty
and service. More often than not, that system forced men into obligations and decisions they’d otherwise not choose
to make. Gaunt had butted up against the system all his career. Was he now seeing that mirrored in another? Or was
Hark just dangerously persuasive?
The latter notion seemed likely. Charisma was one of the chief tools of a good commissar, and Hark seemed to
have it in spades. To say the right thing at the right time for the right effect. Was he just playing with Gaunt?
“I’ve detailed some platoons to bury the dead here,” Hark said. “We can’t afford to carry them with us. A small
service should do it, consecrated by the Pardus chaplain. The wounded are a bigger problem. We have nine serious,
including Captain Herodas. Medic Curth tells me at least two of them won’t live if they don’t reach a hospital by
tomorrow. The others will perish if we keep them with us.”
“Your suggestion?”
“We’re less than a day out from the Doctrinopolis. I suggest we sacrifice a truck, and send them back to the city
with a driver and maybe a few guards.”
“That would be my choice too. Arrange it, please, Hark. Select a Munitorium driver and one Ghost trooper, one
single good man, as armed escort.”
Hark nodded. There was a long pause and Gaunt thought Hark was about to speak again.
Instead he walked away into the gathering gloom.
It was approaching midnight when the last elements of the honour guard convoy rolled in to the deserted village of
Mukret. Both moons were up, one small and full, the other a large, perfect geometric semicircle, and dazzling
ribbons of stars decorated the dark blue sky.
Gaunt looked up at them as he jumped down from his command vehicle. The Sabbat Worlds. The battleground he
had come to with Slaydo all those years before. The starscape of the crusade. For a moment he felt as if it all
depended on this little world, on this little night, on this little continent. On him.
They were the Sabbat Worlds because this was Sabbat’s world. The saint’s place. If ever a soldier had to face his
final mission, none could be more worthy. Slaydo would have approved, Gaunt considered. Slaydo would have
wanted to be here. They weren’t storming some fortress-world or decimating the legions of the arch-enemy. Such
worthy glories and battle honours seemed slight and meaningless compared to this.
They were here for the saint.
Alpha-AR had secured the empty town. The tanks and carriers rolled in, choking the cold night air with their
thunderous exhausts and dazzling lamps.
The main town road was full of vehicles and disembarking troops. Braziers were lit, and pickets arranged.
Mkoll saluted Gaunt as he approached. “You had some trouble, sir.”
“Sometimes the carniv gets you, sergeant,” Gaunt replied. “Sir?”
“From tomorrow, we run a spearhead under your command. Hard armour, fast moving.”
“Not my way, sir, but if you insist.”
“I do. We were caught napping. And paid for it. My mistake.”
“No one’s mistake, sir.”
“Perhaps. But it can only get worse from here. Spearhead, from Mukret, at dawn. Can you manage that?” Mkoll
nodded.
“Do you want to choose the formation or do you trust me to do it?”
The scout sergeant smiled. “You call the shots, sir. I’ve always preferred it that way.”
“I’ll consult Kleopas and let you know.”
They walked through the bustle of dismounting personnel.
“I’ve met a man here,” Mkoll said. “A sort of vagrant priest. You should talk to him.”
“To confess my sins?”
“No sir. He’s… Well, I don’t know what he is, but I think you’ll like him.”
“Right,” said Gaunt. He and Mkoll sidestepped as Tanith troopers backed across their path carrying ammo boxes
and folded mortars for the perimeter defence.
“Sorry, sir,” said Larkin, struggling with a heavy shell crate.
“As you were, Larks,” Gaunt smiled.
“Tough luck about Milo,” said Larkin.
Gaunt felt his blood chill. For one dreadful moment, he wondered if he’d missed Brin’s name on the casualty roll.
“Tough luck?”
“Him going back to the city like that. He’ll miss the show.”
Gaunt nodded warily, and called over Sergeant Baffels, Milo’s platoon commander. “Where’s Trooper Milo?”
“Heading back to the Doctrinopolis with the wounded. I thought you knew, sir.” Baffels, chunky and bearded,
looked awkwardly up at the colonel-commissar.
“Hark selected him?”
Baffels nodded. “He said you wanted a good man to ride shotgun for the wounded.”
“Carry on, sergeant.”
Gaunt walked through the busy activity of the convoy, away, down to the river’s edge, where the rippling water
reflected back the moons and the chirrup of night insects filled every angle of the darkness.
Milo. Gaunt had always joked about the way the men saw Brin Milo as his lucky charm. He’d teased them for
their superstitious foolishness. But in his heart, silently, he’d always felt that it was actually true. Milo had a
charmed life. He had the pure flavour of lost Tanith about him. He was their last and only link to the Ghosts’ past.
Gaunt had always kept him close for that reason, though he’d never, ever admitted it.
Hark had chosen Milo to be the one to return to the holy city. Accident? Coincidence? Design?
Hark had already stated he had studied the Tanith records. He had to know how psychologically important Brin
was to the Ghosts. To Gaunt.
Gaunt had a nasty feeling he’d been deliberately undermined.
Worse still, he had a feeling of doom. For the first time, they were going out without Milo. He already knew this
mission was going to be his last.
Now, with a sense of terrifying premonition, he felt it was going to rum bad. Very bad indeed.
Far away now, chasing back down the Tembarong Road towards the Doctrinopolis, the lone troop track thundered
through the night.
Milo had ridden in the cab for the first part of the overnight journey, but the obese Munitorium driver had proved
to be surly and taciturn, and then had begun to exhibit a chronic flatulence problem that would have been offensive
even in an open-topped car.
Milo had climbed back to spend the rest of the trip with the wounded men.
Commissar Hark had singled him out for this duty. Milo wondered why. There were any number of troopers who
could have done the job.
Milo wondered if Hark had chosen him because he hadn’t been a proper trooper long. Despite his uniform, some
of the Ghosts still regarded him as the token civilian. He resented that. He was a fething Imperial Guardsman and
he’d take physical issue with anyone who doubted that Even more, he resented missing out on what he knew would
be the last action of the Tanith Ghosts under Ibram Gaunt He doubted there would be much glory in the mission, but
still he yearned to be there.
He felt cheated.
Then, as he watched the moons’ light flickering on the river dashing by, he wondered if Gaunt had told Hark to
select him. His encounter with Gaunt in the Universitariat still stung. Had Gaunt really wished him away?
Most of the wounded were unconscious or asleep. Milo sat beside Captain Herodas in the back of the rocking
track. The captain was pale from blood loss and trauma and his face was pinched. Milo was afraid Herodas wasn’t
going to make it back to the Doctrinopolis, despite Medic Curth’s ministrations. He’d lost so much blood.
“Don’t you go dying on me, sir,” he growled at the supine officer.
“I won’t, I swear it,” Herodas murmured. “Just a bad wound. They’ll fix you up. Feth, you’ll get an augmetic knee,
soon as look at you!”
Herodas laughed but no sound came out of him.
“Sergeant Varl in my mob, he’s got an augmetic shoulder. The latest fething bionics!”
“Yeah?” whispered Herodas. Milo wanted to keep him talking. About anything, any old nonsense. He was worried
what might happen if Herodas fell asleep.
“Oh yes, sir. The latest thing! Claims he can crack nalnuts in his armpit now, he does.”
Herodas chuckled. “You’re gonna miss all the fun coming back with us,” he said.
Milo grimaced. “Not so much fun. The colonel-commissar’s swansong. No great glory in being there for that.”
“He’s a good man,” mumbled Herodas, moving his body as much as the pain allowed to resettle more
comfortably. “A fine commander. I didn’t know him well, but from what I saw, I’d have been proud to be numbered
as one of his.”
“He does his job,” said Milo.
“And more. Vervunhive! I read the dispatches about that. What an action! What a command! Were you there for
that?”
“Hab by fething hab, sir.”
Herodas coughed and smiled. “Something of note. Something to be proud of.”
“It was just the usual,” Milo lied, his eyes now hot with angry tears.
“Glory like that you take it with you to the end of your days, trooper.” Herodas fell silent and seemed to be
sleeping.
“Captain? Captain?”
“What?” asked Herodas, blinking up.
“I — nothing. I see the lights. I see the Doctrinopolis. We’re almost there.”
“That’s good, trooper.”
“Milo. It’s Milo, sir.”
“That’s good, Milo. Tell me what you see.”
Milo rose up in the flatbed of the bouncing truck and looked out through the windy dark at the lambent flames
burning distantly on the Citadel. They made a beacon in the night.
“I see the holy city, sir.”
“Do you?”
“Yes, I see it. I see the lights.”
“How I want to be there,” Herodas whispered.
“Sir? What did you say? Sir?” Milo looked down out of the wind, holding on tight to the truck’s stanchions.
“My name is Lucan Herodas. I don’t feel like being a ‘sir’ anymore. Call me by my name.”
“I will, Lucan.”
Herodas nodded slowly. “Tell me what you see now, Milo.”
“I see the city gates. I see the roofs and towers. I see the temples glowing like starflies in the dark.”
Lucan Herodas didn’t reply. The truck rolled in under the Pilgrim Gate. Dawn was just a suggestion at the horizon.
Ten minutes later, the truck drew up in the yard of the western city infirmary.
By then, Herodas was dead.
EIGHT
THE WOUNDED
“As I have been called to the holy work, so I will call others to me.”
—Saint Sabbat, epistles
“A fine, fair, bright morning, Colm, you old dog,” Dorden announced as he walked into the little side room that had
been reserved for the Tanith second-in-command. Early daylight poured in like milk through the west facing
casement. The air was cool with the promise of a hot day ahead. A smell of antiseptic wafted in from the hospital
halls.
There came no immediate reply, but then Corbec was a notoriously heavy sleeper.
“Did you sleep well?” Dorden asked conversationally, moving towards the cabinet beside the gauze-veiled bed.
He hoped the sound of his voice would slowly, gently rouse the colonel so he could check him over. More than
one orderly had received a slap in the mouth for waking Corbec too abruptly.
Dorden picked up a small pottery flask of painkillers. “Colm? How did you sleep? With all the noise, I mean?”
The sounds of the relentless evacuation had gone on all night, and even now, he could hear the thump of equipment
and bustle of bodies in the street outside. Every half hour, the ascending wail of transporter jets roared over the
Doctrinopolis as bulk transports lifted away into the sky.
The considerable, gothic manse of the Scholam Medicae Hagias lay on the west bank of the holy river facing the
Universitariat, and thus occupied the heart of one of the most populated and active city quarters. A municipal
infirmary and teaching hospital attached to the Universitariat, the Scholam Medicae was one of the many city
institutions sequestered by the Imperial liberation force to treat wounded men.
“Funny I don’t seem to be sleeping at all well myself,” Dorden said absently, weighing the pill-bottle in his hand.
“Too many dreams. I’m dreaming about my son a lot these days. Mikal, you know. He comes to me in my dreams all
the time. I haven’t worked out what he’s trying to tell me, but he’s trying to tell me something.”
Below the little room’s window, an argument broke out. Heated voices rose in the still, clear air.
He went to the window, unlatched the casement and leaned out. “Keep it down!” he yelled into the street below.
“This is meant to be a hospital! Have you no compassion?”
The voices dropped away and he turned back to face the veiled bed.
“This feels light to me,” he said softly, gesturing with the flask. “Have you been taking too many? It’s no joke,
Corbec. These are powerful drags. If you’re abusing the dose…”
His voice trailed off. He stepped towards the bed and pulled back the gauzy drapes.
The bed was empty. Rucked, slept in, but empty.
“What the feth—?” Dorden murmured.
The basilica of Macharius Hagia was a towering edifice on the east side of the Holyditch chelon markets. It had four
steeples clad in grey-green ashlar, a stone imported from off-world and which contrasted starkly with the pinks and
russets and creams of the local masonry. A massive statue of the Lord Solar in full armour, raising his lightning
claws to the sky in a gesture of defiance or vengeance, stood upon a great brick plinth in the entrance arch.
Inside, out of the day’s rising heat, it was cold and expansive. Doves and rat-birds fluttered in the open roof
spaces and flickered across the staggeringly broad beams of sunlight that stabbed down into the nave.
The place was busy, even at this early hour. Blue-robed ayatani bustled about, preparing for one of the morning
rites. Esholi fetched and carried for them, or attended the needs of the many hundreds of worshippers gathering in the
grand nave. From the east side, the breeze carried the smells of cooking fish and bread, the smells of the public
kitchens adjoining the temple, whose charitable work was to produce alms and free sustenance twice a day for the
visiting pilgrims.
The smells made Ban Daur hungry. As he limped in down the main colonnade amidst the other faithful, his
stomach gurgled painfully. He stopped for a moment and leaned hard on his walking stick until the dizzying
discomfort passed. He hadn’t eaten much since taking his wound, hadn’t done much of anything, in fact. The medics
had banned him from even getting out of bed, but he knew best how he felt. Strong, surprisingly strong. And lucky.
The ritual blade had missed his heart by the most remarkably slim margin. The doctors worried the wound might
have left a glancing score across the heart muscle, a weakness that might rupture if he exerted himself too soon.
But he could not just lie in bed. This world, Hagia… It was coming to an end. The streets were full of military
personnel and civilians trying to pack up and ship out the contents of their lives. There was fear in the air, and a
strange sense of unreality.
He started to walk again, but had to stop quickly. He was still light-headed, and sometimes the wound ache in his
chest came in bitter waves.
“Are you all right, sir?” asked a passing esholi, a teenage boy in cream silk robes. There was concern in the eyes
of the shaven-headed youth.
“Can I help you to a seat?”
“Mmmh… Perhaps, yes. I may have overdone things.”
The student took his arm and guided him across to a nearby bench. Daur lowered himself gratefully onto it.
“You’re very pale, sir. Should you even be on your feet?”
“Probably not. Thank you. I’ll be fine now I’m sitting.”
The student nodded and moved on, though Daur saw him again some minutes later, talking to several ayatani and
pointing anxiously Daur’s way.
Daur ignored them and sat back to gaze up at the high altar. The shortness of breath was the worst thing. Exertion
got him out of breath so quickly and then he couldn’t catch it back because taking deep breaths was agony on his
wound.
No, that wasn’t the worst thing. A knife in the chest wasn’t the worst thing. Being injured in battle and missing the
last mission of his regiment… even that wasn’t the worst thing.
The worst thing was the thing in his head, and that wouldn’t leave him alone.
He heard voices exchanging hard words nearby and looked round. So did all the worshippers in earshot. Two
ayatani were arguing with a group of officers from the Ardelean Colonials. One of the Colonials was repeatedly
gesturing to the reliquary. Daur heard one of the priests say “…but this is our heritage! You will not ransack this holy
place!”
Daur had heard the same sentiments expressed several times in the last day or so. Despite the abominable evil that
moved towards them with the clear intent to engulf the entire world, few native Hagians wanted the evacuation.
Many of the ayatani, in fact, saw the removal of icons and relics for safekeeping tantamount to desecration. But Lord
General Lugo’s decrees had been strict and inflexible. Daur wondered how long it would be before a Hagian was
arrested for obstruction or shot for disobedience.
He felt an immeasurable sympathy for the faithful. It was almost as if his wounding had been an epiphany. He’d
always been a dutiful man, dutiful to the Imperial creed, a servant of the God-Emperor. But he’d never thought of
himself as especially… devout.
Until now. Until here on Hagia. Until, it seemed to Ban Daur, the very moment an Infardi dagger had punched
between his ribs. It was like it had changed him, as if he’d been transformed by sharp steel and his own spilt blood.
He heard about men undergoing religious transformations. It scared him. It was in his head and it wouldn’t leave him
alone.
He felt he needed to do something about it, desperately. Limping his way from the infirmary to the nearest temple
was a start, but it didn’t seem to achieve much. Daur didn’t know what he expected to happen. A sign, perhaps. A
message.
Such a thing didn’t seem very likely.
He sighed, and sat back with his eyes closed for a moment. He was scheduled to join a troop ship with the other
walking wounded at six that evening. He wasn’t looking forward to it. It felt like running away.
When he opened his eyes, he saw a familiar figure amongst the faithful at the foot of the main altar. It was such a
surprise, Daur blinked in confusion.
But he was not mistaken. There was Colm Corbec, his left arm webbed in a sling tight against his bandaged chest,
the sleeve of his black fatigue jacket hanging empty, kneeling in prayer.
Daur waited. After a few minutes, Corbec stood up, turned, and saw Daur sitting in the pews. A look of
puzzlement crossed the grizzled giant’s face. He came over at once.
“Didn’t expect to see you here, Daur.”
“I didn’t expert to see you either, colonel.”
Corbec sat down next to him.
“Shouldn’t you be resting in bed?” Corbec asked. “What? What’s so funny?”
“I was about to ask you that.”
“Yeah, well…” Corbec murmured. “You know me. Can’t abide to be lying around idle.”
“Has there been any word from the honour guard?” Corbec shook his head. “Not a thing. Feth, but I…”
“You what?”
“Nothing.”
“Come on, you started to say something.”
“Something I don’t think you’d understand, Daur.”
“Okay.”
They sat in silence for a while.
“What?” Daur looked round sharply at Corbec.
“What what?” growled Corbec.
“You spoke.”
“I didn’t.”
“Just then, colonel. You said—”
“I didn’t say anything, Daur.”
“You said ‘Sabbat Martyr’ I heard you.”
“Wasn’t me. I didn’t speak.”
Daur scratched his cheek. “Never mind.”
“What… what were those words?”
“Sabbat Martyr. Or something like that.”
“Oh.”
The silence between them returned. The basilica choir began to sing, the massed voices shimmering the air. “You
hungry, Ban?”
“Starving, sir.”
“Let’s go to the public kitchens and get some breakfast together.”
“I thought the temple kitchens were meant to serve the faithful.”
“They are,” said Corbec, getting to his feet, an enigmatic half-smile on his lips. “Come on.”
They got bowls of fish broth and hunks of crusty, huskseed bread from the long-canopied counters of the kitchens,
and went to sit amongst the breakfasting faithful at the communal trestle tables under a wide, flapping awning of pink
canvas.
Daur watched as Corbec pulled what looked like a couple of pills from his coat pocket and gulped them down
with the first sip of broth. He didn’t comment.
“There’s something not right in my head, Ban,” Corbec began suddenly through a mouthful of bread. “In my head…
or my gut or my soul or wherever… somewhere. It’s been there, off and on, since I was a held captive by Pater Sin,
rot his bones.”
“What sort of thing?”
“The sort of thing a man like me… a man like you too, would be my guess… has no idea what to do with. It’s
lurked in my dreams mostly. I’ve been dreaming about my father, back home on lost Tanith.”
“We all have dreams of our old worlds,” said Daur cautiously. “It’s the guard curse.”
“Sure enough, Ban. I know that. I’ve been guard long enough. But not dreams like this. It’s like… there’s a
meaning to be had. Like… Oh, I dunno…” Corbec frowned as he struggled to find adequate words.
“Like someone’s trying to tell you something?” Daur whispered softly. “Something important? Something that has
to be done?”
“Sacred feth!” growled Corbec in amazement. “That’s it exactly! How did you know?”
Daur shrugged, and put his bowl down. “I can’t explain. I feel it too. I didn’t realise… Well, I didn’t until you
started describing it there. It’s not dreams I’m having. Gak, I don’t think I’m dreaming much at all. But a feeling…
like I should be doing something.”
“Feth,” murmured Corbec again.
“Are we mad, do you think? Maybe what we both need is a priest who’s a good listener. A confessor. Maybe a
head-doctor.”
Corbec dabbed his bread into the broth distractedly. “I don’t think so. I’ve nothing to confess.
Nothing I haven’t told you.”
“So what do we do?”
“I don’t know. But I know there’s no way in feth I’m getting on that troop ship tonight.”
He’d stolen a few hours’ sleep in a corner of the western city infirmary’s entrance hall. But as the sun rose and the
noise of people coming and going became too much to sleep through, Brin Milo shouldered his pack and rifle and
began the long walk up the Amad Road into the centre of the Doctrinopolis.
Hark had told him to report to Guard command once he’d escorted the wounded party to safety. He was to present
himself and arrange his place on an evacuation ship.
The city seemed like a place of madness around him. With the fighting over, the streets had filled up with hurrying
crowds, honking motor vehicles, cargo trains hauled by servitors, processions of worshippers, pilgrims, protesters,
refugees. The city was seething again, like a nalmite nest preparing to swarm.
Milo remembered the last, final hours in Tanith Magna, the same atmosphere of panic and activity. The memories
were not pleasant. He decided he wanted to be out of here now, on a troop ship and away.
There was nothing here now he wanted to stay for, or needed to stay for.
A flustered Brevian Centennial on crowd control duties told him that Evacuation command had been established in
the royal treasury, but the roads approaching that edifice were jammed with foot traffic and vehicles. The commotion
was unbearable.
Transport shuttles shivered the sky as they lifted up over the holy city. A pair of navy fighters screamed overhead,
low and fast.
Milo turned and headed for the Scholam Medicae where the Tanith wounded were being cared for. He’d find his
own men, maybe Colonel Corbec, he decided. He’d leave with them.
“Brinny boy!” a delighted voice boomed behind him, and Milo was snatched up off his feet in a one-armed bear hug
of crushing force.
“Bragg!” he smiled, turning as he was released.
“What are you doing here, Brin?” beamed Trooper Bragg.
“Long story,” said Milo. “How’s the arm there?”
Bragg glanced contemptuously at his heavily bandaged right shoulder.
“Fixing up. Fething medics refused to let me join the honour guard. Said it was a safe ticket out for me, feth ’em!
It’s not bad. I could’ve still fought.”
Milo gestured to the busy hallway of the Scholam Medicae Hagias they stood in. “Anyone else around?”
“A few. Most of ’em in a bad way. Colonel’s here somewhere, but I haven’t seen him. I was in a bed next to
Derin. He’s on the mend and cussing his luck too.”
“I’m going to try and find the colonel. What ward are you in?”
“South six.”
“I’ll come and find you in a bit.”
“You better!”
Milo pushed on through the hectic hallway through the smells of blood and disinfectant the hurrying figures, the
rattling carts. He passed several doors that opened onto long, red-painted wards lined with critically injured
guardsmen in rows of cots. Some were Ghosts, men he recognised. All were too far gone from pain and damage to
register him. After asking questions of several orderlies and servitors, he found his way to Dorden’s suite of offices
on the third floor. As he approached, he could hear the shouting coming from inside down the length of the corridor.
“…don’t just get up and walk off when you feel like it! For the Emperor’s sake! You’re hurt! That won’t heal if
you put a strain on it!”
An answering mumble.
“I will not calm down! The health of the regimental wounded is my business! Mine! You wouldn’t disobey Gaunt’s
orders, why the feth do you think you can disobey mine?”
Milo walked into the office. Corbec was sitting on an examination couch facing the door, and his eyes opened
wide when he saw Milo. Dorden, shaking with rage, stood facing Corbec and turned sharply when he read Corbec’s
expression.
“Milo?”
Corbec leapt up. “What’s happened? The honour guard? What the feth’s happened?”
“There was an ambush on the road last night. We took a few injured, some bad enough Surgeon Curth wanted them
brought back here. Commissar Hark volunteered me to ride shotgun. We got back here at dawn.”
“Are you meant to return?”
Milo shook his head. “I’d never catch up with them now, colonel. My orders are to join the evacuation now I’m
here.”
“How were they doing? Apart from the ambush, I mean?”
“Not so bad. They should’ve made it to the overnight stop at Mukret.”
“Did we lose many in the attack?” Dorden asked softly. His anger seemed to have dulled.
“Forty-three dead, fifteen of them Ghosts. Six Ghosts amongst the injured I brought back.”
“Sounds bad, Milo.”
“It was quick and nasty.”
“You can show me on the map where it happened,” Corbec told him.
“Why?” snapped Dorden. “I’ve told you already, you’re not going anywhere. Except to the landing fields this
evening. Forget the rest, Colm. I mean it. I have seniority in this, and Lugo would have my fething head. Forget it.”
There was a loaded pause.
“Forget… what?” Milo dared to ask.
“Don’t get him started!” Dorden roared.
“The boy’s just asking, doc…” Corbec countered.
“You want to know, Milo? Do you?” Dorden was livid. “Our beloved colonel here has this idea… No, let me start
at the beginning. Our beloved colonel here decides he knows doctoring better than me, and so gets himself out of bed
against my orders this morning! Goes wandering around the fething city! We didn’t even know where he was! Then
he shows up again without so much as a by your leave, and tells me he’s thinking of heading up into the mountains!”
“Into the mountains?”
“That’s right! He’s got it into his thick head that there’s something important he’s got to do! Something Gaunt, an
armour unit and nigh on three thousand troopers can’t manage without his help!”
“Be fair, I didn’t quite say that Doc…”
Dorden was too busy ranting at the rather stunned Milo. “He wants to break orders. My orders. The lord general’s
orders. In a way, Gaunt’s own orders. He’s going to ignore the instructions to evacuate tonight. And go chasing up
into the Sacred Hills after Gaunt. On his own! Because he has a hunch!”
“Not on my own,” Corbec growled in a whisper.
“Oh, don’t tell me! You’ve persuaded some other fools to go along with you? Who? Who, colonel? I’ll have them
chained to their fething beds.”
“Then I won’t tell you who, will I?” Corbec yelled.
“A… hunch…?” Milo asked quietly.
“Yeah,” said Corbec. “Like one of me hunches…”
“Spare us! One of Colonel Corbec’s famous battle-itches—”
Corbec wheeled round at Dorden and for a moment Milo was afraid he was going to throw a punch. And even
more afraid that the medic was going to throw one back. “Since when have my tactical itches proved wrong, eh?
Fething when?”
Dorden looked away.
“But, no… It’s not like that. Not an itch. Not really. Or it’s like the granddaddy of all battle-itches. It’s more like a
feeling—”
“That’s all right then! A feth-damned feeling!” said Dorden sarcastically.
“More like a calling, then!” bellowed Corbec. “Like the biggest, strongest calling I’ve ever had in me life! Pulling
at me, demanding of me! Like… like if I’ve got the wit to respond, the balls to respond, I’ll be doing the most
important thing I could ever do.”
Dorden snorted. There was a long, painfully heavy pause.
“Colm… it’s my job to look after the men. More than that, it’s my pleasure to look after them. I don’t need orders.”
Dorden sat down behind his desk and fiddled with a sheaf of scripts, not making eye contact with either of the others.
“I came into Old Town with Kolea — broke orders to do it —because I thought we might get you out alive.”
“And you did, doc, and feth knows, I owe you and the boys that one.”
Dorden nodded. “But I can’t sanction this. You — and anyone else you may have talked to —you all need to be at
the muster point for evacuation at six tonight. No exceptions. It’s an order from the office of the lord general himself.
Any dissenters. Any absentees… will be considered as having deserted. And will suffer the full consequences.”
He looked up at Corbec. “Don’t do this to me, Colm.”
“I won’t. They ask you, you don’t know a thing. I’d have liked you to join me, doc, really I would, but I won’t ask
that of you. I understand the impossible position that’d put you in. But what I feel isn’t wrong…”
“Corbec, please—”
“The last few nights, me dad’s been in my dreams. Not just a memory, I mean. Really him. Bringing me a
message.”
“What sort of message?” asked Milo.
“All he says is the same thing, over and over. He’s in his machine shop, back in Pryze County, working the lathe
there. I come in and he looks up and he says ‘sabbat martyr’. Just that.”
“I know what’s going on,” said Dorden. “I feel it myself, it’s perfectly natural. We both know this is Gaunt’s last
show. That Lugo’s got his balls in a vice. And that means, let’s face it the end for the Ghosts. We all want to be there
with Gaunt this last time. The honour guard, the last duty. It doesn’t feel right to be missing it. We’d do anything…
we’d think of any excuse… to get out there after him. Even subconsciously, our minds are trying to magic up ways to
make it happen.”
“It’s not that, doc.”
“I think it is.”
“Well then, maybe it is. Maybe it is me subconscious trying to jinx up an excuse. And maybe that’s good enough
for me. Gaunt’s last show, doc. You said it yourself. They can court martial me, but I won’t miss that Not for
anything.”
Corbec glanced at the silent Milo, patted him on the arm, and limped out of the office.
“Can you talk some sense into him, do you think?” Dorden asked Milo.
“From what I’ve just heard, I doubt it. In all candour, sir, I doubt I want to.”
Dorden nodded. “Try, for my sake. If Corbec’s not at the muster point tonight, I won’t sell him out. But I can’t
protect him.”
Corbec was in his little room, sorting his pack on the unmade bed. Milo knocked at the half-open door.
“You coming with me? I shouldn’t ask. I won’t be offended if you say no.”
“What’s your plan?”
Corbec half-shrugged. “Fethed if I know. Daur’s with me. He feels the same. Really, he feels the same, you
know?” Milo said nothing. He didn’t know.
“Daur’s seeing if he can find any others crazy enough to come. We’ll need able men. It won’t be an easy ride.”
“It’ll be hell. A small unit, moving west. The Infardi are everywhere. They didn’t think twice about hitting a target
the size of the taskforce.”
“We could so do with a scout. Local knowledge, maybe. I don’t know.”
“Assuming we make it through, all the way to the Shrinehold. What then?”
“Feth me! I hope by then me dad will have told me more! Or maybe Daur will have figured it out. Or it’ll be
obvious…”
“It sure isn’t obvious now, sir. Whatever it is, if Gaunt and the taskforce can’t do it, how could we hope to?”
“Maybe they don’t know. Maybe… they need to do something else.”
Corbec turned and smiled at Milo. “You realise you’ve been saying ‘We’, don’t you?”
“I guess I have.”
“Good lad. It wouldn’t be the same without you.”
“Well, feth bless my good soul!” said Colm Corbec. He was so touched by the sight before him, he felt he might cry.
“Did you all… I mean, are you all…?”
Bragg got up from the base of the pillar he was sitting against and stuck out his hand. “We’re all as crazy as you,
chief,” he smiled.
Corbec gripped his meaty paw hard.
“Daur and Milo asked around. We’re the only takers. I hope we’ll do.”
“You’ll do me fine.”
They stood in the shadows of the Munitorium warehouse on Pavane Street, off the main thoroughfare, out of sight.
The contents of the warehouse had been evacuated that morning. It had been arranged as the rendezvous point. It was
now close to six o’clock.
Somewhere, a troop ship was waiting for them. Somewhere, their names were being flagged on the commissariat
discipline lists.
Corbec moved down the line as the assembled troopers got up to greet him. “Derin! How’s the chest?”
“Don’t expect me to run anywhere,” smiled Trooper Derin. There was no sign of injury about him, but his arms
moved stiffly. Corbec knew a whole lot of suturing and bandages lay under his black Tanith field jacket.
“Nessa… my girl.”
She threw him a salute, her long-las resting against her hip. Ready to move out, colonel sir, she signed.
“Trooper Vamberfeld, sir,” said the next in line. Corbec grinned at the pale, slightly out of condition Verghastite.
“I know who you are, Vamberfeld. Good to see you.”
“You said you needed local knowledge,” Milo said as Corbec reached him. “This is Sanian. She’s esholi, one of
the student body.”
“Miss,” Corbec saluted her.
Sanian looked up at Corbec and appraised him frankly. “Trooper Milo described your mission as almost spiritual,
colonel. I will probably lose my privileges and status for absconding with you.”
“We’re absconding now, are we?” The troopers around them laughed.
“The saint herself is in your mind, colonel. I can see that much. I have made my choice. If I can help by coming
with you, I am happy to do it.”
“It won’t be easy, Miss Sanian. I hope Milo’s told you that much.”
“Sanian. I am just Sanian. Or esholi Sanian if you prefer to be formal. And yes, Milo has explained the danger. I
feel it will be an education.”
“Safer ways of getting an education…” Derin began.
“Life itself is the education for the esholi,” said Milo smartly.
Sanian smiled. “I think Milo has been paying too much attention to me.”
“Well, I can see why,” said Corbec, putting on the charm. “You’re welcome here with us. Do you know much
about the land west of here?”
“I was raised in Bhavnager. And the western territories of the Sacred Hills and the Pilgrim’s Way are fundamental
knowledge for any esholi.”
“Well, didn’t we just win the top prize?” grinned Corbec. “So,” he said, turning to face the six of them. “I guess
we wait for Daur. He’s in charge of transport.”
The group broke up into idle chatter for a minute or two. Suddenly, they all heard the clatter of tracks in the street
outside. All of them froze, snatching up weapons, expecting the worst.
“What do you see?” Vamberfeld hissed to Bragg. “It’s the commissariat, isn’t it?” said Derin. “They’re fething on
to us!”
An ancient, battered Chimera rumbled into the warehouse. Its turbines coughed and rasped as they shut down. It
was the oldest and worst kept piece of Munitorium armour Milo had ever seen, and that included the junk piles that
had been given to the honour guard convoy.
The back hatch opened, and Daur edged out as gracefully as his aching wound allowed.
“Best I could do,” he said. “It was one from the motorpool they’re going to abandon in the evacuation.”
“Feth!” said Corbec, walking around the dirty green hulk. “But it goes, right?”
“It goes for now,” replied Daur. “What do you want, Corbec, miracles?”
A second man climbed out of the Chimera. He was a tall, blond, freckled individual in Pardus uniform. His head
was bandaged.
“This is Sergeant Greer, Pardus Eighth Mobile Flak Company. I knew none of us could handle this beast, so I coopted
a driver. Greer here… kind of owes me.”
“That’s what he says,” Greer said sulkily. “I’m just along for the ride.”
“Where’d you get the hurt?” Corbec asked him.
Greer touched his bandage. “Glancing shot. During the action to take the census hall a few days back.”
Corbec nodded. The same action Daur had been hurt in. He shook Greer’s hand.
“Welcome to the Wounded,” he said.
At around half past six the names of troopers Derin, Vamberfeld, Nessa and Bragg, and of Captain Daur and Colonel
Corbec, were noted in the log of the evacuation office as overdue. The lift shuttle left without them.
At a muster point further east across the Doctrinopolis, the Pardus chief surgeon noted the absence of Driver-
Sergeant Greer.
Both reports were sent to Evacuation command and entered into the night log. The officer of the watch wasn’t
unduly taxed by this. He had over three hundred names on his list of absentees by then, and it was growing with each
passing shuttle call. There were many reasons for missed muster: badly relayed orders; confusion as to the correct
muster point; delays because of traffic in the holy city; untagged deaths from the guard infirmaries. Indeed, some
names on the evacuation lists were of troopers who had died in the liberation fight and as yet lay undiscovered and
unidentified in the rubble.
Some, a very few, were deserters. Such names were passed to the discipline offices and the lord general’s staff.
The officer of the watch passed these latest names on. It was unusual for senior officers like a colonel to fail to
report.
By eight o’clock, the list had dropped onto the desk of Commissar Hychas, who was away at dinner. His aide
passed it to the punishment detail, who by nine thirty had sent a four-man team led by a commissar-cadet down to the
Scholam Medicae Hagias to investigate. A report was copied to Lord General Lugo’s staff, where it was read by a
senior adjutant shortly before midnight. He immediately voxed the punishment detail, and was told by the
commissar-cadet that no trace of the missing personnel could be found at the Scholam Medicae.
At one in the morning, a warrant was issued for the arrest of Colonel Colm Corbec of the Tanith First-and-Only,
along with six of his men. No one thought or knew to tally this with the warrant out for Sergeant-Driver Denic Greer
of the Pardus Eighth. Or the theft report of a class gamma transport Chimera from the Munitorium motorpool.
By then, Corbec’s Chimera was long gone, heading west down the Tembarong Road, five hours out from the city
perimeter, thundering into the night.
It had made one stop, in the half-empty, wartorn suburb streets just short of the Pilgrim Gate. That had been around
seven at night, with deep, starless dusk falling.
At the helm, Greer had seen a figure in the road ahead, waving at them. Corbec had popped the turret hatch and
looked out, almost immediately calling down at Greer to pull over.
Corbec had dropped down from the waiting Chimera, his boots kissing the road dust, and had walked to meet the
figure face to face.
“Sabbat martyr,” Dorden had said, tears in his eyes. “My boy told me to. Don’t think for a minute you’re going
without me.”
NINE
APPROACHING BHAVNAGER
“If the road is easy, the destination is worthless.”
—Saint Sabbat, proverbs
From Mukret, the highway ran due west to the Nusera Crossing where the holy river twisted across it. North of the
crossing, the river’s course snaked up to the headwaters in the hills, one hundred and fifty kilometres away.
The second day of the mission dawned soft and bright, with the lowland plains of the river valley dressed in thick
white fogs. The scout spearhead under Mkoll left Mukret through the early fogs, travelling at a moderate rate because
of the reduced visibility.
Gaunt and Kleopas had assembled three scout Salamanders carrying a dozen Ghost troopers between them, two
Conqueror tanks and one of the two Destroyer tank hunters in the Pardus complement. The main taskforce set out
from Mukret an hour behind them.
Gaunt’s intention was to reach the farming community of Bhavnager by the second night. This meant a run of nearly
ninety-five kilometres, on decent roads. But already the mists were slowing their progress. At Bhavnager, so
intelligence reported, they could refuel for the later stages of the journey. Bhavnager was the last settlement of
appreciable size on the north-west spur of the highway. It marked the end of the arable lowlands and the start of the
rainwood districts that dressed the climbing edges of the Sacred Hills. From Bhavnager, the going would become a
lot tougher.
Ayatani Zweil had agreed to accompany the main task-force, and rode with Gaunt in his command Salamander at
the colonel-commissar’s personal invitation. He seemed intrigued by the Imperial mission: no one had told him of
the intended destination, but he clearly had ideas of his own, and once they took the north-west fork at Limata, there
would be no disguising where they were heading.
“How long do these fogs last, father?” Gaunt asked him as the convoy ran through the pale, smoke-like mists. It
was bright and the fogs glowed with the sunlight beyond, but they could see only a few dozen metres ahead of
themselves. The sounds of the convoy engines, amplified, were thrown back on them by the heavy vapour.
Zweil toyed with his long, white beard.
“In this part of the season, sometimes until noon. These, I think, are lighter. They will lift. And when they lift, they
go suddenly.”
“You’re not much like the other ayatani I’ve met here, if you’ll forgive me saying so. They all seemed tied to a
particular shrine and places of worship.”
Zweil chuckled. “They are tempelum ayatani, devoted to their shrine places. I am imhava ayatani, which means
‘roving priest’. Our order celebrates the saint by worshipping the routes of her journeys.”
“Her journeys here?”
“Yes, and beyond. Some of my kind are up there.” He pointed a gnarled finger at the sky, and Gaunt realised he
meant space itself, space beyond Hagia.
“They travel the stars?”
“Indeed. They pace out the route of her Great Crusade, her war pilgrimage to Harkalon, her wide circuit of return.
It can take a lifetime, longer than a lifetime. Few make the entire circuit and return to Hagia.”
“Especially in these times, I imagine.”
Zweil nodded thoughtfully. “The return of the arch-enemy to the Sabbat Worlds has made such roving a more lethal
undertaking.”
“But you are content to make your holy journeys here?”
Zweil smiled his broad, gap-toothed smile. “These days, yes. But in my youth, I walked her path in the stars. To
Frenghold, before Hagia called me back.”
Gaunt was a little surprised. “You’ve travelled off this world?”
“We’re not all parochial little peasants, Colonel-Commissar Gaunt. I’ve seen my share of the stars and other
worlds. A few wonders on the way. Nothing I’d care to stay for. Space is overrated.”
“I tend to find that too,” Gaunt grinned.
“The main purpose of the imhava ayatani is to retread the routes of the saint and offer assistance to the believers
and pilgrims we find making their way. Guardians of the route. It is, I think, small-minded for a priest to stay at a
shrine or temple to offer aid to the pilgrims who arrive. The journey is the hardest part. It is on the journey that most
would have need of a priest.”
“That’s why you agreed to come with us, isn’t it?”
“I came because you asked. Politely, I might add. But you’re right. You are pilgrims after all.”
“I wouldn’t call us pilgrims quite—”
“I would. With devotion and resolve, you are following one of the saint’s paths. You are going to the Shrinehold,
after all.”
“I never said—”
“No, you didn’t. But pilgrims usually travel east.” He gestured behind them in the vague direction of the
Doctrinopolis. “There’s only one reason for heading this way.”
The vox squawked and Gaunt slid down into the driving well to answer it. Mkoll was checking in. The spearhead
had just forded the holy river at Nusera and was making good speed to Limata. The fogs, Mkoll reported, were
beginning to lift.
When Gaunt resumed his seat, he found Zweil looking through his ragged copy of Sabbat’s gospel.
“A well-thumbed book,” said Zweil, making no attempt to set it aside. “Always a good sign. I never trust a pilgrim
with a clean and pristine copy. The texts you’ve marked are interesting. You can tell much of a man’s character by
what he chooses to read.”
“What can you tell about me?”
“You are burdened… hence the numerous annotations in the Devotional Creeds… and burdened by responsibility
and the demands of office in particular… these three selections in the Epistles of Duty show that you seek answers,
or perhaps ways of fighting internal daemons… that is plain from the number of paper strips you’ve used to mark the
pages of the Doctrines and Revelations. You appreciate battle and courage… the Annals of War, here… and you are
sentimental when it comes to fine devotional poetry…”
He held the book out open to show the Psalms of Sabbat.
“Very good,” said Gaunt.
“You smile, Colonel-Commissar Gaunt.”
“I am an Imperial commander leading a taskforce of war on a mission. You could have surmised all that about me
without even looking at the bookmarks.”
“I did,” laughed Zweil. He carefully closed the gospel and handed it back to Gaunt.
“If I might say, colonel-commissar… the gospel of our saint does contain answers. But the answers are often not
literal ones. Simply reading the book from cover to cover will not reveal them. One has to… feel. To look around the
bare meanings of the words.”
“I studied textual interpretation at Scholam Progenium…”
“Oh, but I’m sure you did. And from that I’m sure you can tell me that when the saint talks of the ‘flower
incarnadine’ she means battle, and when she refers to ‘the fast-flowing river of pure water’ she means true human
faith. What I mean to say is the lessons of Saint Sabbat are oblique mysteries, to be unlocked by experience and
innate belief. I’m not sure you have those. The answers you seek would have come to you by now if you had.”
“I see.”
“I meant no disrespect. There are high ayatani in the holy city who do no more than read and reread this work and
fancy themselves enlightened.”
Gaunt didn’t reply. He looked out of the rocking tank and saw how the fog was beginning to burn off with
remarkable haste. Already the tree-lines at the river were becoming visible.
“Then how do I begin?” Gaunt asked darkly. “For, truth be told, father, I have need of answers. Now more than
ever before.”
“I can’t help you there. Except to say, start with yourself. It is a journey you must make, standing still. I told you
you were a pilgrim.”
Half an hour later, they reached the crossing at Nusera. The highway came down to a wide, shallow pan of shingle
that broke the fast flowing water in a broad fording place. Groves of ghylum trees clustered at either bank, and
hundreds of forkbills broke upwards into the sky in an explosive fan at the sound of the motors, their wings beating
the air with the sound of ornithopter gunships.
A lone peasant with an ancient cow chelon on a pull-rein waved them past. One by one, the vehicles of the honour
guard ploughed over the ford, spraying up water so hard and high that rainbows marked their wake.
Limata was another dead town. Mkoll’s spearhead reached it just before eleven thirty. The fogs had vanished. The
sun was climbing and the air was still. This day was going to be even hotter than the last.
The baking roofs of Limata lay ahead, dusty and forlorn, their tiles bright pink in the sunlight. No breeze, no
sounds, no telltale fingers of cookfire smoke rising above the village. Here, the Tembarong Road divided, one spur
heading southwest towards Hylophon and Tembarong itself. The other broke north-west into the highlands and the
steaming tracts of the rainwoods. Forty-plus kilometres in that direction lay Bhavnager.
“Slow to steady,” Mkoll snapped into his vox. “Troopers arm. Load main weapons. Let’s crawl in.”
Captain Siras, commanding the Pardus elements, voxed in immediately from his Conqueror. “Allow us, Tanith.
We’ll drive ’em down.”
“Negative. Full stop.”
The vehicles came to a halt six hundred metres short of the town perimeter. The Ghosts dismounted from the
Salamanders. Idling engines rumbled in the hot, dry air.
“What’s the delay?” Sims snapped over the vox.
“Stand by,” replied Mkoll. He glanced around at Trooper Domor, one of the disembarked troopers. “You sure?”
“Sure as they call me Shoggy,” Domor nodded, carefully using a felt cloth to wipe dust grit from the lenses of his
augmetic eyes. “You can see the way the road surface there is broken and repacked.”
Most eyes couldn’t but Mkoll’s were sharper than any in the regiment. And Domor’s field specialisation was in
landmines.
“Want me to sweep?”
“Might be an idea. Unship your kit, but don’t advance until I say.”
Domor went over to his Salamander with troopers Caober and Uril to unpack the sweeper sets.
Mkoll fanned fire-teams out into the acestus groves on either side of the roadway, Mkvenner to the left and Bonin
to the right, each with three men.
Within seconds of entering the dappled shadows of the fruit trees, the men were invisible, their stealth cloaks
absorbing the patterns around them.
“What’s the delay?” asked Captain Sims from behind. Mkoll turned. Sirus had dismounted from his waiting
Conqueror, the Wrath of Pardua, and had come forward to see for himself. He was a robust man in his early fifties,
with the characteristic olive skin and beak nose of the Pardus. He seemed a little gung-ho to Mkoll, and the scout
sergeant had been disappointed when Kleopas had appointed him to Mkoll’s spearhead company.
“We’ve got road mines in a tight field there. And maybe beyond.” Mkoll gestured. “And the place is too quiet for
my liking.”
“Tactics?” Sirus asked briefly.
“Send my sweepers forward to clear the road for you and infiltrate the village from the sides with my troops.”
Sims nodded sagely. “I can tell you’re infantry, sergeant. Bloody good at it too, so I hear, but you haven’t the
armour experience. You want that place taken, my Wrath can take it.”
Mkoll’s heart sank. “How?”
“That’s what the Adeptus Mechanicus made dozer blades for. Give the word and I’ll show you how the Pardus
work.”
Mkoll turned away and walked back to his Salamander. This wasn’t his approach to recon patrols. He certainly
didn’t want the Pardus heavies lighting up the hill for all to see with their heavy guns. He could take Limata his way,
by stealth, he was sure. But Gaunt had urged him to co-operate with the armour allies.
He reached into the Salamander and pulled out the long-gain vox mic. “Recon Spear to one.”
“One, go ahead.”
“We’ve got possible obstruction here at Limata. Certainly a minefield. Request permission for Captain Sims to go
in armoured and loud.”
“Is it necessary?”
“You said to play nice.”
“So I did. Permission granted.”
Mkoll hung up the mic and called to Domor’s group. “Pack it away. It’s the Pardus’ turn.”
Griping, they began to disassemble the sweeper brooms.
“Captain?” Mkoll looked over to Sims. “It’s all yours.”
Sims looked immensely pleased. He ran back to his revving tank.
At his urging, riding high in the open hatch of his turret, the two Conquerors clanked past the waiting Salamanders
and headed down the highway. The grim Destroyer waited behind them, turbines barely murmuring.
The two battle tanks lowered their hefty dozer blades as they came up on the mined area and dug in, driving
forward.
Captain Sims’ mine clearance methods were as brutal as they were deafening. The massive dozer blades ploughed
the hardpan of the road and kicked up the buried munitions which triggered and detonated before them. Clouds of
flame and debris swirled up around the advancing tanks. If the mines had been triggered under a passing vehicle,
they would have crippled or destroyed it, but churned out like the seeds of a waterapple or flints turned up by a
farrier’s plough, they exploded harmlessly, barely scorching the thrusting dozer blades.
It was an impressive display, Mkoll had to admit.
Smoke and dust drifted back down the road over Mkoll and the waiting Salamanders. Mkoll shielded his eyes and
purposely kept his off-road fire-teams in position.
In less than six minutes, the Wrath of Pardua and its sister tank Lion of Pardua were rolling into Limata, the road
buckled and burning behind them.
Mkoll got up on the fender of his Salamander and ordered all three light tanks to move forward after them.
He looked round. The Destroyer had disappeared.
“What the feth?” How did something that big and heavy and ugly disappear?
“Recon Spear command to Destroyer! Where the feth are you?”
“Destroyer to command. Sorry to startle you. Standard regimental deployment. I pulled off-road to lie low. Frontal
assaults are the Conquerors’ job, and Sirus knows what he’s doing.”
“Read that, Destroyer.” Mkoll, who was generally inexperienced when it came to tank warfare, had already noted
the clear differences between the Conqueror battle tanks and the low-bodied Destroyers. Where the Conquerors
were high and proud, stately almost, with their massive gun turrets, the Destroyers were long-hulled and sleek, their
one primary weapon not turret-mounted but fixed out forward from their humped backs. The Destroyers were
predators, tank hunters, armed with a single, colossal laser cannon. They were, it seemed to Mkoll, the tank
equivalent of an infantry sniper. Accurate, cunning, hard-hitting, stealthy.
The Destroyer appointed to the Recon Spear was called the Grey Venger. Its commander was a Captain LeGuin.
Mkoll had never seen LeGuin face to face. He just knew him by his tank.
Through the rising pall of smoke, Mkoll saw the Conquerors were in the village now. They were kicking up dust.
Abrupt small arms fire rained against their armoured bodies from the left.
The Wrath of Pardua traversed its turret and blew a house apart with a single shell. Its partner began shelling the
right flank of the town’s main drag. Stilt houses disintegrated or combusted. The sponson-mounted flamers on both
Conquerors rippled through the close-packed buildings and turned them into torched ruins.
Captain Sirus’ whoops of triumph came over the vox. Mkoll could see him in his turret, supporting his main
weapon’s blasts with rakes from the pintle mount.
“That’s just showing off,” Domor said beside him.
“Tank boys,” murmured Caober. “Always wanting to show who’s boss.”
Advancing, they found the bloody, burnt remnants of maybe three dozen Infardi in the ruins Sims had flattened,
Limata was taken. Mkoll signalled the news to Gaunt and advanced the spearhead, bringing his fire-teams in and
reforming the force with the Salamanders at the front. The Destroyer trundled out of hiding and joined the back of the
column.
“Next stop Bhavnager!” Sirus warbled enthusiastically from his Conqueror.
“Move out,” ordered Mkoll.
Well over a day behind them, Corbec’s thrown-together team rolled past the site of the ambush, skirting around the
wrecks of the Salamanders and the Chimera that the task-force’s Trojans had pushed to the roadside verges.
Corbec called a halt. The Chimera’s turbine was overheating anyway, and the troopers dismounted for a rest
Corbec, Derin and Bragg wandered over to the roadside where a plot of dark earth and rows of fresh-cut stakes
marked the graves of the fallen.
“One we missed,” said Derin.
Corbec nodded. This site marked the first Ghosts action that he hadn’t been a part of. Not properly. All the way
from Tanith he’d come, to be with his men. Here, they’d fought and died while he had been lying in his bed miles
away.
His chest hurt. He swallowed a couple more pain-pills with a swig of tepid water from his flask.
Greer had dismounted from the Chimera on the road and had yanked back its side cowlings to vent greasy black
smoke. He reached in with a wrench, trying to soothe its ailing systems.
Milo thought he’d talk to Sanian, but the esholi had wandered down to the water’s edge with Nessa. It looked like
the Verghastite girl was teaching the student the rudiments of sign language.
“She likes to learn, doesn’t she?”
Milo looked round and met Captain Daur’s smile. “Yes, sir.”
“I’m glad you found her, Brin. I don’t think we’d last long without a decent guide.”
Milo sat himself down on a roadside stump and Daur sat next to him, cautiously nursing his wounded body down.
“What do you know, sir?” Milo asked.
“About what?”
“About this mission. Corbec said you knew as much as him. That you — uh—felt the same way.”
“I can’t offer you an explanation, if that’s what you’re asking for. I just have this urge in my head…”
“I see.”
“No, you don’t. And I know you don’t. And I love you like a brother for daring to come this far in such ignorance.”
“I trust the colonel.”
“So do I. Have you not had dreams? Visions?”
“No, sir. All I have is my loyalty to Corbec. To you. To Gaunt. To the God-Emperor of mankind…”
“The Emperor protects,” Daur put in dutifully.
“That’s all. Loyalty. To the Ghosts. That’s all I know. For now, that’s all I need.”
“But you delivered to us our guide,” a calm, frail voice said suddenly.
“I did what?”
Daur paused and blinked.
“What?” he asked Milo, who was looking at him mistrustfully.
“You said ‘but you delivered to us our guide’, just then. Your voice was strange.”
“Did I? Was it?”
“Yes, sir.”
“I meant Sanian…”
“I know you did, but that was a pretty odd way of saying it.”
“I don’t remember… Gak, I don’t remember saying that at all.”
Milo looked at Daur dubiously. “With all respect, captain, you’re weirding me out here.”
“Milo, I think I’m weirding myself out,” he said.
“Doc.”
“Corbec.”
They stood in the groves overlooking the burial place. It was the first chance they’d got to talk alone since leaving
the Doctrinopolis.
“Your son, you say? Mikal?”
“My son.”
“In your dreams?”
“For days now. I think it started when I was looking for you in Old Town, you old bastard.”
“You haven’t dreamt of Mikal before?”
Mikal Dorden had died on Verghast. He had been the only Ghost to escape the destruction of Tanith with a blood
relative alive. Trooper Mikal Dorden. Chief Medic Tolin Dorden. Ghosts together, father and son, until…
Vervunhive and Veyveyr Gate.
“Of course. Every night. But not like that. This was like Mikal wanted me to know something, to be somewhere.
All he said was ‘sabbat martyr’. When you said the words too, I realised.”
“It’s going to be hard,” said Corbec softly, “getting up there.” He pointed up towards the Sacred Hills, which
lingered distantly, partly obscured by the smudge of a rainstorm over the woods.
“I’m ready, Colm,” Dorden smiled. “I think the others are too. But keep your eye on Trooper Vamberfeld. His first
taste of combat hasn’t gone down well. Shock trauma. He may get past it naturally, but some don’t. I don’t think he
should be here.”
“In truth, none of us should. I took what I could get. But point taken. I’ll be watching him.”
“I respect you.”
“I’m sure you do, buddy,” said Greer, nursing the old Chimera’s engines back to health. “But I do, I respect you,”
repeated Trooper Vamberfeld.
“And what’s that?” asked Greer off-hand as he unclamped a fuel pipe.
“To join this pilgrimage. It’s so holy. So, so holy.”
“Oh, it’s so holy sure enough,” growled Greer. “Did the spirit of the saint speak to you?” Vamberfeld asked.
Greer looked round at him with a cynical eyebrow cocked. “Did she speak to you?”
“Of course she did! She was triumphant and sublime!”
“That’s great. Right now, I’ve got an engine to fix.”
“The saint will guide your work…”
“Will she crap! The moment Saint Sabbat manifests here and helps me flush out the intercooler, then I’ll believe.”
Vamberfeld looked a little crestfallen. “Then why do you come?”
“The gold, naturally,” Greer said, over-stressing each word as one would to a child. “What gold?”
“The gold. In the mountains. Daur must’ve told you about it?”
“N-no…”
“Only reason I’m here! The gold ingots. My kind of come-on.”
“But there is no treasure. Nothing physical. Just faith and love.”
“Whatever you reckon.”
“The captain wouldn’t lie.”
“Of course he wouldn’t.”
“He loves us all.”
“Of course he does. Now if you’ll excuse me…”
Vamberfeld nodded and walked away obediently. Greer shook his head to himself and returned to work. He didn’t
get these Tanith, too intense for his liking. And ever since he’d arrived on Hagia he’d heard men rambling on and on
about faith and miracles. So, it was a shrineworld. So what? Greer didn’t hold with that sort of stuff much. You
lived, you died, end of story. Sometimes you got lucky and lived well. Sometimes you got unlucky and died badly.
God and saints and flicking angels and stuff was the sort of nonsense men filled their with heads with when bad luck
came calling.
He wiped his hands on a rag, and cinched the hose clamp tighter. This mob of losers was a crazy lot. The colonel
and the doctor and that complete sad-case Vamberfeld were mooning on about visions and saints, clearly all out of
their heads. The deaf girl he didn’t get. The big guy was an idiot. The boy Milo was way too up himself, and only
here because he had the hots for that local girl, who was incidentally a nutjob in Greer’s humble opinion. Derin was
the only one who seemed remotely okay. Greer was sure that was because Derin was along for the gold too. Daur
must have persuaded the rest of the lunatics to sign on by buying into their saint fixations.
Daur was a hard case. He looked all clean-cut and stalwart, the very model of a young, well-bred officer. But
under the surface ticked the heart of a conniving bastard. Greer knew his type. Greer hadn’t liked Daur since the
moment they’d met in the prayer yard. Dressing him down in front of his men like that. Greer had only ended up
wounded because he’d been going balls-out in the fight to prove his mettle and win back his rep. But Daur had
needed a driver, and he’d cut Greer in on the loot. Temple gold, stacks of ingots, taken secretly from the
Doctrinopolis treasury to a place of hiding when the Infardi invaded. That’s what Daur had told him. He’d got the
inside track from a dying ayatani. Worth deserting for in Greer’s book.
He wouldn’t be surprised if Daur intended to waste the others once they were home and dry. Greer would be
watching his back when the time came. He’d get in first if he had to. For now though, he knew he was safe. Daur
needed him more than any of the others.
Vamberfeld was the one he worried about most. Daur had recruited everyone except Sanian and Milo from the
hospital, from amongst the injured, and they all had bandaged wounds to prove it. Except Vamberfeld. He was a
psych case, Greer knew. The timid behaviour, the thousand-metre stare. He’d seen that before in men who were on
the way to snapping. War fever.
Greer didn’t want to be around when the snap came.
He closed the engine cowling. “She’s running! Let’s go if we’re going!”
The company moved back to rejoin the Chimera. For the umpteenth time that day, Corbec wondered what he had
got himself into. Sometimes it felt so decisively right, but the rest of the time the doubts plagued him. He’d broken
orders, and persuaded eight other guardsmen to do the same. And now he was heading into enemy country. He
wondered what would happen if they got into a situation. Milo was sound and able bodied, but the doc and Sanian
were non-combatants. Nessa was strapped up with a healing las-wound in her belly, Bragg’s shoulder was useless,
Daur and Derin had chest wounds that slowed them down badly, Greer had a head-wound, and Vamberfeld was
teetering on the edge of nervous collapse. Not to mention his own, aching wounds.
Hardly the most able and fit fire-team in the history of guard actions. Nor the best equipped. Each trooper had a
lasrifle — in Nessa’s case a long-las sniper model — and Bragg had his big autocannon. They had a box of tubecharges
but were otherwise short on ammo. As far as he knew they had only half a dozen drums for the cannon. The
Chimera had a storm bolter on its pintle, but given its performance so far, Corbec wasn’t sure how much longer it
would be before they were all walking.
He wondered what Gaunt would do in this situation. He was pretty sure he knew. Have them all shot.
Through the trees, thick roadside glades of acestus and slim-trunked vipirium, they began to see the outlines of
Bhavnager.
It was late afternoon, the sun was infernally bright and hot, and the heat haze was distorting every distance. The
Recon Spear had made excellent time, and word on the vox was that the main convoy was only seventy minutes
behind them.
Mkoll pulled them to a halt and headed out into the groves with Mkvenner to do a little scouting. They crouched in
the slanting shadows of the wild fruit trees and panned their magnoculars around. The air was still and breathless, as
dry and hot as baked sand. Insects ticked like chronometers in the gorse thickets.
Mkoll compared what he saw with the town plan on his map. Bhavnager was a large place, dominated by a large
white-washed temple with a golden stupa to the east and a massive row of brick-built produce barns to the southwest.
Prayer kites and flags dangled limply from the golden dome in the breeze-less air. The road they were
following entered in the south-eastern corner, ran in south of the temple to what looked like a triangular market place
which roughly denoted the town centre, and then appeared again north of large buildings on the far outskirts that
Mkoll took to be machine shops. A streetplan of smaller roads radiated out from the market, lined with shops and
dwellings.
“Looks quiet,” said Mkvenner.
“But alive this time. Figures there, in the market.”
“I see them.”
“And two up there, on the lower balcony of the temple.”
“Lookouts.”
“Yeah.”
The pair moved forward and down a little, parallel to the highway. Once the road came out of the fruit groves it
was open and unprotected for over fifteen hundred metres right down to the edge of the town. Trees had been felled
and brush cleared.
“They don’t want anyone sneaking up on them, do they?”
Mkoll held up his hand, the signal for quiet. They both now detected movement in the trees twenty metres to their
right, right on the road itself.
With Mkvenner a few paces behind him in cover, las raised, Mkoll slid forward silently through the dry
undergrowth. He slipped his silver blade from its sheath.
The man was watching the road from a small culvert under the trees, His back was to Mkoll. The vehicles of the
Recon Spear were out of sight beyond the road turn, but he must have heard their engines. Had he sent a signal
already or was he waiting to see what came around the bend?
Mkoll took him out with a fast, sudden lunge. The man didn’t have time to realise he was dead.
He was dressed in green silk, his filthy skin livid with tattoos.
Infardi.
Mkoll checked the corpse and found an old autorifle but no vox set. Tucked into a hand-dug hole in the side of the
culvert was a round mirror. Simple but effective signalling, perhaps to another invisible spotter down the road. How
many others? Had they already rolled in past some?
He looked back at the town in time to see sunlight glint and flash off something on the temple balcony. A minute or
so later, it repeated.
An answer? A question? A routine check? Mkoll wondered whether to use the mirror or not. He’d tip them off if
he got the signal wrong, but would a lack of response be as bad?
The flash from the temple came again.
“Chief?” Mkvenner hissed over the headset vox.
“Go.”
“I see flash-signals.”
“On the temple?”
“No. Far side of the road from you, about thirty metres, right where the tree-line ends.”
Mkvenner had a better angle. Mkoll moved back out of the culvert softly and edged down a little way, his stealth
cloak pulled around him. He could see the man now, on the far side of the road under a swathe of camo-netting. The
man was looking up the highway and seemed not to have made out Mkoll yet.
Mkoll sheathed his blade and took up his lasrifle. The sound suppressor was screwed in place. He seldom took it
off in country.
He waited for the man to shift around and raise his mirror again and then put a single shot through his ear. The
Infardi spotter tumbled back out of sight.
The scouts headed back to the Recon Spear. Sirus was waiting, with the commander of the other Conqueror.
“No idea of numbers but the place is held by the enemy,” explained Mkoll. “We picked off a couple of lookouts on
the road. They’re watching the approach carefully and they’ve made the south edge of the town clear. I’d prefer to
take the time to disperse my troops into the woods here to clear for other spotters and maybe make a crawl approach
after dark, but I think the clock’s against us. They’ll notice their spotters are quiet before long, if they haven’t
already.”
“We’ll have the whole bloody convoy bunching up behind us in less than an hour,” said Sirus.
“Maybe that’s how to play it,” said the other commander, a short man called Farant or Faranter, Mkoll hadn’t quite
caught it. “Wait until the main elements arrive and then just go in, full strength.”
It made sense to Mkoll. They could waste a lot of time here trying to be clever. Maybe this was an occasion where
sheer brute force and might were the best course. Simple, direct, emphatic. No messing about.
“I’ll get on the vox and run it past the boss,” he said, and walked over to his Salamander.
There was a faint, distant bang, muffled by the dead air of the hot afternoon. A second later, a whooping shriek
came down out of the sky.
“Incoming!” Sirus yelled. All the men broke for cover.
With a roar, the shell hit the roadline twenty-five metres short of them and blew a screen of trees out onto the
track. After a moment, two more exploded in the trees to their left, hurling earth and flames into the cloudless blue.
Soil drizzled down over them. Both Conquerors came around the Salamanders, the Wrath of Pardua leading the
way. More shells now, detonating all around them. The enemy had either done an excellent job of range-finding or
had just got very lucky.
“Hold! Sirus, hold back!” Mkoll yelled into the vox as his Salamander lurched forward. He had to duck as debris
from a perilously close shell raided across the hull.
This was shelling from more than one gun. Multiple points, field guns maybe, large calibre ordnance by the size of
the shell strikes. Where the hell were they hiding a battery of artillery?
Farant’s Conqueror suddenly came apart in a huge fireball. The explosion was so fierce the Shockwave punched
Mkoll off his feet. Splintered armour shards rained down. Caober cried out as one ripped his forehead.
The blazing remains of the Pardus tank filled the centre of the road, turret disintegrated, bodywork fused and
twisted, tread segments disengaged and scattered. The Wrath was beyond it, moving down the roadway.
“Enemy armour! Enemy armour!” Sims bawled over the vox-link.
Mkoll saw them. Two main battle tanks, painted bright lime green, main guns roaring as they tore their way out
through the fruit tree stands and onto the road ahead.
That was why he’d seen no artillery positions. It wasn’t artillery.
The Infardi had armoured vehicles. Lots of them.
TEN
THE BATTLE OF BHAVNAGER
“Do not shirk! Do not falter! Give them death in the name of Sabbat!”
—Saint Sabbat, at the gates of Harkalon
Heedless of the 105mm shells tearing into the highway and trees around him, Sims confronted the Infardi armour
head-on. The Wrath of Pardua sped forward with a clank of treads and fired its main gun. The hypervelocity round
hit the nearest of the two enemy vehicles, exploding into the rear mantlet of its turret with such force the entire turret
mount spun round through two hundred and ten degrees. The tank clearly retained motive power, because it continued
to churn along the road, but its traverse system was crippled and the turret and weapon swung around slackly with
the motion. The Wrath fired again, mere seconds before a shell from the second tank glanced lengthways along its
starboard flank. The hit buckled and tore its track guards and then fragmented off into the trees.
The Wrath’s second shot had missed. The disarmed Infardi machine was closing to less than forty metres now, and
its hull-mounted lascannon began to spit bolts of blue light at Sirus’ Conqueror. The other enemy tank was trying to
pull around its wounded colleague for a clearer shot knocking down a row of saplings and small acestus trees as it
hauled half its bulk off the highway and through the verge underbrush. Heavy shelling from as yet unseen Infardi units
continued to lacerate the position.
With furious las-fire from the injured tank now splashing off the Wrath of Pardua’s front casing, Sims ordered his
layer to address the other tank coming around the first. Re-laying the gun took a vital second. In that time, the second
tank fired again and hit the Wrath squarely. The impact was enough to lurch all sixty-two tonnes of armoured
machine several metres sideways. But it didn’t penetrate the twenty-centimetre-thick armour skin. Inside, the crew
was dazed, and they’d lost most of the forward scopes. Sims bellowed to retask, but the tank was now right on them
and looming for the kill.
A devastating lance of laser fire raked past the Wrath and cut through the assaulting vehicle below the turret.
Internally stored munitions went off and the tank exploded with such force that the main body and track assemblies
cartwheeled over in a blistering fireball. The blast wake and shrapnel cleared a semicircle of woodland twenty
metres in radius.
The Destroyer Grey Venger had struck.
From the open cab of his rapidly reversing Salamander, Mkoll saw the long, low Destroyer prowl past, palls of
heat discharge spuming from the vent louvres around its massive fixed laser cannon. It nudged aside the burning
wreck of Farant’s dead Conqueror and came up alongside the Wrath.
But the crew of the Wrath of Pardua had recovered their wits and swiftly nailed the remaining aggressor hard at
short range, blowing out its port track sections and shunting it away lame with the shell impact. It began to burn.
By then, the trio of scout Salamanders had reversed far enough to be able to turn.
“Break off and retreat!” Mkoll shouted into the vox. “Fall back to waymark 00.58!”
LeGuin immediately acknowledged, but Mkoll got nothing from Sims.
Fething idiot wants to stay in the fight, Mkoll thought. From his machine’s tactical auspex, he counted at least ten
good-size targets moving up towards their position from Bhavnager.
But Sims suddenly appeared out of the Wrath’s top hatch, looking back through the gusting smoke to Mkoll. The
last hit had taken out his vox system and intercom. Mkoll made damn sure Sims understood his hand signals.
The Grey Venger stood its ground and walloped two more incandescent blasts down the road at targets Mkoll
couldn’t see. Probably just discouragement tactics, he thought. Who wants to ride an MBT into woodland cover
when you know an Imperial Destroyer is waiting for you?
The Wrath of Pardua reversed hard and swung around to follow the Salamanders, traversing its turret to the rear
to cover their backs. Then, as it too began bravura discouragement shelling, the Venger came about and trundled after
them all so fast its hull rocked and rose nose up on its well-sprung torsion bar traction.
Deafened and a little bloodied, the Recon Spear made off down the highway away from the bombardment, which
continued for some fifteen minutes after they had withdrawn. There was no sign of pursuit.
Mkoll voxed the bad news to Gaunt.
Keeping a weather eye on the northern approaches for signs of the enemy, the Recon Spear waited to rendezvous
with the main honour guard strength at waymark 00.58, a west-facing escarpment of grass pasture fifteen kilometres
south of Bhavnager.
The sun was beginning to sink and the intense heat of the day was dissipating. A southerly was blowing cooler air
down from the misty shapes of the Sacred Hills, which now could be seen rising above the wide green blanket of the
rainwoods on the northern horizon.
Mkoll got out of his Salamander, passing Bonin who was field stitching the gash in Caober’s face, and walked
towards the Wrath of Pardua. He took the time to gaze at the Sacred Hills: dark uplands seventy kilometres away,
then behind them, higher peaks fading to an insubstantial grey in the distance. Behind them still, about a hundred
kilometres beyond, the majestic jagged summits of the Sacred Hills proper: transparent, icy titans with their heads
lost in ribbons of cloud, nine thousand metres above sea level. It was quite a prospect.
The fact that getting there involved struggling past at least one enemy tank unit dug into their only guaranteed fuel
depot, then rainwood jungle, then increasingly high mountains, made it all the more chilling.
Thunder, the reveille call of a too hot day in summer, crackled around the neighbouring hills. The taste of rain was
a promise on the rising breeze. Swells of grey cloud, as mot-tied as Imperial air-camo schemes, rolled in from the
north, staining a sky that had otherwise been cloudless and blue since the fogs lifted that morning.
Small chelons and goat-like herbivores grazed and ruminated in the lush meadows beyond the raised pasture of the
waymark point. Their throat bells clanged dully as they moved.
Sims and his men were running emergency repairs to the great, wounded Wrath of Pardua. They were joking and
laughing with their captain, revelling in the details of the recent combat and the fact they had come away alive. No
one spoke of the dead crew. There would be due time for recognition later. Mkoll felt sure that once the obstacle of
Bhavnager was done with, there would be more than one Conqueror to mourn.
A figure approached him across the wind-shivered grass. Mkoll knew at once it was the so far unseen LeGuin. He
was a short well-made man in his thirties, dressed in tan Pardus fatigues and a fleece-lined leather coat. He
unbuttoned his leather skull-guard as he approached, unplugging the wire of his headset. His skin was darker than
most of the Pardus men, his eyes glittering blue.
“Cool head, sergeant,” he said, offering Mkoll his hand.
“Looked mighty tight there for a minute,” Mkoll replied.
“It was, but so are the best fights.”
“I thought Sims might blow it,” Mkoll ventured.
LeGuin smiled. “Anselm Sims is a bravo and a glory hound. He’s also the best Conqueror boss in the Pardus.
Except maybe for Woll. They have a rivalry. Both multi-aces. But permit Sims his heroics. He’s the very best.”
Mkoll nodded. “I know similar infantrymen. I thought they’d got him there, though. But for you.”
“My greatest pleasure in life is using my girl’s main mount to effect. I was just doing my job.”
The Grey Venger lay nearby, hull down in a grassy lea, its massive muzzle pointing north up the road. Mkoll
reflected that if he’d ever been schooled into armour, a Destroyer would have been his machine of choice. As far as
fifty-plus tonnes of rattling armoured power could be said to be stealthy, it was a silent predator. A hunter. Mkoll had
a kinship with hunters. He’d been one all his adult life before the guard and, in truth, he’d been one ever since too.
Some of the grazers in the meadow below suddenly looked up and began to move away west.
A minute later, they heard the gathering thunder from the south.
“Here they come,” said LeGuin.
The honour guard assembled at the waymark, spreading its strength out in a firm defensive line facing the north. As
the tanks took up station, the Hydra batteries behind them, the infantry dismounted and dug in.
“Now we’ll see fun, sure as sure,” Trooper Cuu informed Larkin as they took position in the grasses.
“Not too much fun, I hope,” Larkin mumbled back, test-sighting up his long-las.
As the force secured the position, Gaunt called his operational and section chiefs for a briefing. They assembled
around the back of his Salamander: Kleopas, Rawne, Kolea, Hark, Surgeon Curth, tank commanders, squad leaders,
platoon sergeants. Some brought dataslates, some charts. Most clutched tin cups of fresh brewed caffeine or smokes.
“Opinions?” he asked, drawing the briefing to order.
“We’ve got no more than four hours of light left. Half of that will go getting into position,” Kleopas said. “I take it
we’re looking at dawn instead.”
“That means we’re looking at noon at least to refuel and turn around, provided we can break Bhavnager,” replied
Rawne. “That’s half a day chopped off our timetable just like that.”
“So what?” Kleopas asked cynically. “Are you saying we rush ahead and hit them up tonight, major?”
Some of the Pardus laughed.
“Yes,” Rawne answered coldly, as if it was so obvious Kleopas must be a fool to miss it. “Why lose the daylight
we have left? Is there another way?”
“Airstrike,” said Commissar Hark. To a man, the tank soldiers moaned.
“Oh, please! This is a prime opportunity to engage with armour,” said Sirus. “Leave this to us.”
“I’ll tell you what it is, captain,” said Gaunt darkly. “This is a prime opportunity to discharge a mission for the
God-Emperor as expediently and efficiently as we can. What it’s not is an opportunity to let you heap up glory by
forcing a tank fight.”
“I don’t think that’s what Sirus meant, sir,” said Kleopas as Sirus scowled.
“I think it’s exactly what he meant,” said Hark lightly.
“Whatever he meant, I’ve been talking to navy strike command at Ansipar. The air wing is tied up with the
evacuation. They wouldn’t tell me more than that. We might get an airstrike if we wait two days. As Major Rawne
pointed out, time is not for wasting. We’re going to take Bhavnager ourselves, the hard way.”
Sirus smiled. There was murmuring.
Gaunt consulted the assessment reports on-slate. “We know they have at least ten armour units. Non-Imperial
MBTs.”
“At least ten,” repeated Sirus. “I doubt they would have fielded their entire complement to chase off a raid.”
“Type and capability?” Gaunt asked, looking up.
“Urdeshi-made tanks, type AT70s,” said LeGuin. “Indifferent performance and slow on the fire rate. 105-mil guns
as standard. They’re common here in this subsector and favoured by the arch-enemy.”
“They’ve been cranking them out of the manufactories on Urdesh ever since the foe took that world,” said LeTaw,
another tank officer.
“The Reaver model by the look of the ones I saw,” LeGuin went on. “Promethium guzzlers with cheap armour, and
loose in the rear on a turn. Our Conquerors outclass them. Unless they have the numbers, of course.”
“From the hammering we got on the road, I’d say they had a minimum of five self-propelled guns too,” said Sirus.
“At the very least,” said LeGuin. “But there’s another thing. They continued to shell the roadway for quite a time
after we pulled back. I bet that’s because they didn’t know we’d gone. They had an efficient string of spotters and
lookouts, but my guess is their onboard scanners are very much lower spec than ours. No auspex. No landscape
readers. Until they or their spotters actually see us, they’re blind. We, on the other hand…”
“Noted,” said Gaunt. “Okay, here’s how we’re going to play it. Head-on assault following the roadline. Tonight. If
we think it’s dicey leaving it so close to nightfall, you can bet they won’t expect it. Armour comes out of the woods
and spreads. Infantry behind, supporting with anti-tank weapons. I want two full strength troop assaults pushing
ahead into the south of the town here. Kolea? Baffels? That’s you. Around the warehouse barns.”
He pointed to his chart.
“Here’s the winner. A side thrust. Maybe four or five tanks, in from the east with infantry support and the
Salamanders. Objective is the temple and then pushing through to the fuel stores. Hydra batteries will slug down
from the roadline here.”
“What about civilians?” asked Hark.
“I haven’t brought any, have you?”
The men laughed.
“Bhavnager is a clear and open target. I’ll say it now so there’s no mistake about it. We prosecute this town with
maximum prejudice. Even if there are civilians, there are no civilians. Understood?”
The officers assented quickly. Gaunt ignored Curth’s dark look.
“Kleopas, you have command of the main charge. I’ll bring the Ghosts in behind you. Rawne? Sirus? You have the
side thrust. Varl? I want you to play watchdog with a platoon on the road. Stay behind the Hydras and cover the
transport and supply train. Bring them in only when we signal the town as secure. Go word is ‘Slaydo’. Support
advance is ‘Oktar’. Retreat command is ‘Dercius’. Vox channel is beta-kappa-alpha. Secondary is kappa-beta-beta.
Any questions?”
There were none. With under two hours of daylight left, sunset burning off the mountains and rain on the wind, the
honour guard fell upon Bhavnager.
LeGuin’s Grey Venger, and the company’s other Destroyer, the name Death Jester painted in crimson on its plating
skirts, went in first along the highway, cleaning off the outer perimeter. Between them, they made eight kills, all
Infardi MBTs covering the fruit groves on the road.
Mkoll led a scout platoon in with them. They rode on the Destroyers’ hulls until they reached the treecover and
then scattered into the spinneys. The Ghosts rolled forward in a wave alongside the hunting tank killers, locating and
cutting the observation posts of the enemy signal line by stealth.
Venger and Jester bellied down at the edge of the trees overlooking Bhavnager as the main assault force swooped
in past them, the Heart of Destruction leading the way. The ground shook, and mechanical thunder rolled through the
still air. Troops dismounted in full strength from the trucks behind them, and then the transporters retreated to
waymark 00.60, where Varl and his unit guarded the Chimeras, Trojans and tankers.
The word was given and the word was “Slaydo”. Under Kleopas, twelve battle machines charged towards
Bhavnager from the south, eleven Conquerors and the company’s single Executioner, an ancient plasma tank
nicknamed Strife.
By then, the enemy had seen the smoke and flash of the Destroyer kills in the woods and had launched out in force.
Thirty-two AT70 Reavers, all painted gloss lime, plus seven model N20 halftracks mounting 70-mil anti-tank
cannons. Major Kleopas considered ruefully that this was considerably more than Captain Sims’ estimate of “at
least” ten Reavers and five self-propelled guns. This was going to be a major engagement. A chance to snatch glory
from the din of battle. A chance to find death. The sort of choice the Pardus were bred to make.
Despite the appalling odds, Kleopas grinned to himself.
The Imperial Hydras, dug-in and locked out sprayed their drizzle of rapid fire over the town from the tree-line.
Two thousand Ghosts fanned out over the open approach in the wake of Kleopas’ charging armoured cavalry.
Already, small arms fire was cracking at them from the town edge.
The tank fight began in earnest Kleopas’ squadron was formed in a trailing V with the Heart of Destruction at the
tip. They had the slight advantage of incline in the cleared ground between the fruit groves and the town edge and
were making better than thirty kph. The enemy mass, in no ordered formation, churned up the slope to meet them,
kicking rock chips and dry soil out behind them as their tracks dug in. They played out in a long, uneven line.
In the command seat of the Heart, Kleopas checked the readings of his auspex, glowing pale yellow in the halflight
of the locked down turret against the eyeball view through his prismatic up-scope. He used his good right eye
for this, not his augmetic implant, an affectation his crew often joked about. Kleopas then adjusted his padded leather
headset and flicked down the wire stalk of the voice mic.
“Lay on and fire at will.”
The Conqueror phalanx began to fire A dozen main weapons blasting and then blasting again. Bright balls of gasflame
flashed from their muzzles and discharge smoke streamed back from their muzzle brakes, fuming in long white
trails of slipstream over their hulls. Three AT70s sustained direct hits and vanished in flurries of metal and fire Two
more were crippled and foundered, beginning to burn. A halftrack lurched lengthways as a round from the Conqueror
Man of Steel punched through its crew bay and shredded it like a mess tin hit by a las-shot.
The elderly Pardus Executioner tank Strife, commanded by Lieutenant Pauk, was slower on its treads than the
dashing Conquerors, and trailed at the end of the left-hand file. Its stubby, outsized plasma cannon razed a gleaming
red spear of destruction down the slope and explosively sheared the turret off an AT70 in a splash of shrapnel and
spraying oil.
The enemy mass began firing back uphill with resolved fury. The main weapons of the AT70s were longer and
slimmer than the hefty muzzles of the Imperial Conquerors. Their blasts made higher, shrieking roars and sparked
star-shaped gas-burns from the flash-retarders at the ends of their barrels. Shells rained down across the Imperial
charge.
LeGuin had been right. Examples of old, sub-Imperial standard technology, the Reavers lacked any auspex
guidance or laser rangefinding. It was also clear they had no gyro stabilisers. Once the Conqueror guns were aimed,
they damn well stayed aim-locked thanks to inertial dampers, no matter how much bouncing and lurching the tank
was experiencing. That meant the Conquerors could shoot and move simultaneously without any appreciable loss of
target lock. The AT70s fired by eye and any movement or jarring required immediate aim revision.
In the Heart of Destruction, Kleopas smiled contentedly. The enemy was chucking hundreds of kilos of munitions
up the slope at them, but most of it was going wide or overshooting. They were not designed for efficient mobile
shooting. If their supremo had only had the good sense to stop his armour dead and fire on the Imperial charge from
stationary locks, he would have been ahead on points by now.
Even so, more by luck than judgement, the enemy scored hits. The Conqueror known as Mighty Smiter was hit
simultaneously by two rounds from different adversaries, exploded and slewed to an ugly halt, greasy black smoke
pouring out of the hatches. Drum Roll, another Conqueror, under the command of Captain Hancot, was hit in the
starboard tread section and lost its tracks in a shower of sparks and steel fragments. It lurched and came to a stop,
but continued to fire.
Captain Endre Woll made his second kill of the day and his crew let out a cheer. Woll was a tank ace, adored by
the Pardus regiment, and Situs’ chief rival. Under the stencil reading Old Strontium on the side of his steed was a
line of sixty-one kill marks. Sirus and the Wrath of Pardua claimed sixty-nine. Electric servos swung Old
Strontium’s turret basket around and Woll executed a perfect kill on a veering AT70. The noise in the Conqueror
turret was immense, despite the sound-lagging and the crew’s ear-protectors. When it fired, the breech of the main
gun hurtled back into the turret space with one hundred and ninety tonnes of recoil force The novice loaders and gun
layers at Pardus boot camp quickly trained themselves to be alert and nimble. As the breech slammed back, a
battered metal slide funnelled the red-hot spent shell case into the cartridge hopper and the loader swung round with
a fresh shell from the water-jacketted magazine thumping it into place with the ball of his palm. The layer consulted
the rangefinder and the crosswind sensor, and obeyed Woll’s auspex-guided instructions. Woll always kept one eye
on the target reticule displayed on his up-scope. Like all good soldiers, he only trusted tech data so far. Target at
11:34!” Woll instructed.
“11:34 aye!” the layer repeated, jerking the recoil brake. The gun roared.
Another Reaver was reduced to a rapidly expanding ball of fire and scrap.
The Pardus armour men were trained for mobile cut and thrust. The Conquerors’ time-honoured torsion-bar
suspension systems and high power to weight ratio meant they were more nimble than most of the adversaries they
encountered, whether super-heavy monsters or lacklustre mediums like the ones the Infardi were fielding. That meant
the Conquerors were perfect cavalry tanks, built to fight on the move, to charge, to out-manoeuvre and overwhelm
the foe.
But there came a crucial moment in any armour-cav charge where the decision had to be made to halt, break or
break through. Kleopas knew that moment was at hand. The dream intention of any armour charge was to utterly
crush the target formation. But the Infardi outnumbered them three to one, and more tanks were massing at the edge of
the town. Kleopas cursed… the Infardi had mustered in division strength at Bhavnager. The major had to keep
revising Sirus’ original estimate up and up. Forget about major engagement, this was becoming historic.
The Conquerors were about to meet the enemy head-on. Kleopas had three choices: stop dead and fight it out
standing, break through the enemy line and turn to finish the job, or separate and pincer.
A stand-up fight was a worst case option. It would allow the Reavers to play to their strengths. Breakthrough was
psychologically strong, but it meant reversing the playing field, and the Pardus would then be fighting back up hill,
risking their own infantry coming in behind.
“Pincer three-four! Pincer now!” Kleopas instructed his squadron. The left-hand edge of the V
formation carried on with Kleopas at the head, crashing past and between the Infardi machines. The right edge,
under Woll, spread wide in a lateral line and slowed right down.
Gearboxes and differentials grinding, the tanks of Kleopas’ wing rotated almost on a point, spraying up loose
earth, and presented at the hindquarters of the enemy line. All Leman Russ pattern tanks, like the Conquerors,
delivered deliriously low ground pressure through their track arrangement, and possessed fine regenerative steering.
These almost balletic turns were a trademark move. Six more AT70s blew out as they were struck from the rear, and
two more and a halftrack fell to Woll’s straggler line.
The sloping field south of Bhavnager became a tank graveyard. Flames and debris covered the ground, and
burning wrecks littered the incline. Huddles of Infardi crew, ejected from escape hatches, ran blindly for cover.
Some of the Reavers, lurching on their old-style volute spring suspension, tried to come about to engage Kleopas’
line, and were blown apart from both sides. The front formation of the Infardi armour was overrun and slaughtered.
But the day was nothing like won yet.
The Man of Steel shuddered and lost its front end in a spurting fireball. From the edge of the town, an N20
halftrack, sensibly bedded down and unmoving, had hit it squarely with its anti-tank cannon.
Kleopas blanched as he heard Captain Ridas screaming over the vox-net as fire swamped his turret basket.
Moments later, the conqueror Pride of Memfis was destroyed by a traversing AT70. Plasma spitting out with searing
brilliance, Lieutenant Pauk’s Strife evened the score.
As Kleopas’ tanks hauled around on their regenerative steering again, Woll’s line came through the kill-field,
crunching and rolling over enemy wrecks. Eighteen more AT70s were spread around the town’s southern limits and
were bombarding steadily from standing. The shell deluge was apocalyptic. Woll counted nine Usurper-pattern selfpropelled
guns firing from positions behind the AT70 front. The boxy Usurpers carried howitzers, crude but efficient
copies of Imperial Earthshakers, slanting forward out of their gun pulpits. Behind them came twelve more N20s,
moving in a file down the marketplace road. It was going to get worse before it got better.
“Line up, line up!” Gaunt cried, and his call was repeated down the infantry file from platoon leader to platoon
leader. The Ghosts had formed in position at the edge of the tree-line, behind the four raiding Hydra batteries, and
had been watching in awe and admiration for the last ten minutes as the tank fight boiled across the approach field
below.
“Men of Tanith, warriors of Verghast, now we do the Emperor’s duty! Advance! By file! Advance!”
Starting to jog, and then to run, the massed force of Ghosts came down the field, through the blasted landscape,
bayonets fixed.
A few shells dropped amongst them. Glaring tracers spat overhead. The air was filthy with smoke. Kolea led the
left-hand point of the advance, Sergeant Battels the right, with Gaunt somewhere between them.
Gaunt allowed his designated assault leaders to move ahead, confident in their abilities, while he took time to
pause and mm to yell encouragement and inspiration to the hundreds of troopers streaming down the slope. He
brandished his power sword high so they could see it.
Right then, he missed Brin Milo. Milo should be here, he thought, piping the Ghosts into battle. He yelled again,
his voice almost hoarse.
Commissar Hark was advancing with Baffels’ mob. His shouts and urgings lacked the rousing fire of Gaunt’s. He
was new to them, he hadn’t shared what Gaunt had shared with them. Still he urged them on.
“Destroyers signal their advance in our support,” Vox-officer Beltayn reported to Gaunt as they ran forward.
Gaunt looked back to see the Grey Venger and the Death Jester rise up on their torsion springs and begin to prowl in
at the heels of the infantry. It made a change to advance under armour, Gaunt thought. This was the Imperial Guard at
its most efficient. This was inter-speciality co-operation. This was victorious assault.
Ana Curth and the medical party pushed down in the wake of the charging Ghosts. The ground they were covering
was ruined by the furious tank fight and stank of fuel and fyceline. Shells had torn it up, so that the chalky bed rock
was ploughed up over the black topsoil in white curds and lumps. It looked to Curth as if the very entrails of the
earth had been blown out and exposed. This was a dead landscape, and they would undoubtedly extend and enlarge
it before they were finished with Bhavnager.
Lesp darted to the left as a Ghost went down. Another two fell to an overshot tank round immediately ahead and
Chayker and Foskin ran forward.
“Medic! Medic!” the scream rose from the massed confusion of manpower before her.
“I have it!” Mtane called to her, scrambling over the broken ground to a Ghost who was hunched over a squealing,
disembowelled friend.
This is hell, Curth thought. It was her first taste of open war, of full-scale battle. She’d been through the urban
horrors of Vervunhive, but had only ever read about the experience of pitched war in exposed territory. Battlefields.
Now she understood what the term meant. It took a lot to shock Ana Curth, and death and injury wasn’t enough.
What shocked her here was the raging, callous fury of the battle. The scale, the size, the gak-awful noise, the mass
charge.
The mass wounding. The randomness of pain and hurt. “Medic!”
She pulled open her field kit, running forward between the plumes of fire kicked up by falling shells and heavy
las-fire.
Every time she thought she knew the horrors of war, it gleefully exposed new ones. She wondered how men like
Gaunt could be even remotely sane after a life of this.
“Medic!”
“I’m here! Stay down, I’m here!”
From waymark 07.07, the side thrust began their assault. They congregated a kilometre to the east of Bhavnager at an
outlying farm. Even from this distance, the thunder of the main assault four kilometres away was shaking the ground.
Rawne spat in the dust and picked up the lasrifle he had lent against the farmyard’s drybrick perimeter wall.
“Time to go,” he said.
Captain Sirus nodded and ran back towards his waiting tank, one of six Conquerors idling behind the abandoned
farmstead.
Feygor, Rawne’s adjutant, armed his lasgun and roused up the troops, close on three hundred Ghosts.
The wind was up, and the sun setting. Gold light radiated from the bulbous stupa of the temple a kilometre away.
Rawne adjusted his vox. “Three to Sirus. You see what I see?”
“I see the eastern flank of Bhavnager. I see the temple.”
“Good. If you’re ready… go!”
The six Conquerors roared out of their holding position and charged across the open fields and meadows towards
the eastern edge of the town. Behind them came the convoy’s eight remaining Salamanders. Rawne hopped up onto
the running boards of one of the command Salamanders and rode it in, turning back to supervise the infantry group
advancing behind him.
The five Conquerors chasing Sirus’ Wrath of Pardua were named Say Your Prayers, Fancy Klara, Steel Storm,
Lucky Bastard and Lion of Pardua, the latter the Wrath’s sister tank. Rocking over terrain humps and irrigation
gullies, the Pardus machines began firing, their shots hammering at the looming temple and its precincts. Puffs of
white smoke plumed from the distant hits silently.
Almost immediately, four AT70 tanks appeared around the northern side of the temple Two spurred forward into
the edges of the wet arable land, the others stopped dead and commenced shelling.
The Fancy Klara, commanded by Lieutenant LeTaw, crippled one of the moving tanks with a beautiful long range
shot that would have made Woll himself proud. But then, as it bounced up over a tilled field, a tungsten-cored tank
round hit the Klara squarely, penetrating the turret mantle and puncturing down through the basket. LeTaw lost his
right arm and his gunlayer was instantly liquidised. The incandescent shell pierced the water jackets of the Klara’s
magazine and didn’t explode.
The Conqueror swerved to a halt. LeTaw was numb with shock. He could barely pull aside his seat harness to
look round. The interior of the turret was painted with a slick film of gore, the only remaining physical trace of his
layer.
The loader had fallen from his metal stool, and was curled foetally on the floor of the basket, drenched in blood.
“Holy Emperor,” LeTaw murmured, looking down through the crisp-edged hole in the side of the magazine. Filthy
water from the jackets dribbled out, diluting the blood on the floor. He could see sizzling fire inside the hole, the
heat-shock residue of the impact.
“Get out!” he cried.
The loader looked blank, shocked out of his mind.
“Get out!” LeTaw repeated, reaching for the escape hatch pull with an arm that was no longer there.
Laughing at the macabre oddness of it, he swung around and reached up with his remaining hand. He heard the
driver scrambling out through the forward hatch.
With a pop, heat-exchanger conduits in the side of the turret, weakened by the shell impact, burst. Scalding water
spurted out, hitting LeTaw in the face before cascading down to broil his loader.
LeTaw tried to scream. The loader’s shrieks echoed around the tank interior.
The shell had severed electrical cables in the footwell of the turret. The swirling water met the fizzling ends.
LeTaw and his loader were electrocuted even as they writhed and screamed and blistered.
Targeting a stationary AT70, the Steel Storm exchanged shot after shot with it. Lieutenant Hellier, commanding the
Steel Storm, realised his inertial dampers were damaged and that his auspex must consequently be out.
He shut the electronic systems down and began to aim through the reticule of the up-scope. He called out lay
numbers to his aimer and was about to make a confident kill when the tank exploded, flipped over and broke apart.
The Steel Storm had hit the edge of the so-far undetected mine-field east of Bhavnager. The Wrath of Pardua
crossed into the field immediately behind it, losing track pins and part of its side plating to an exploding mine.
Gunning its drive into full reverse, it was able to limp backwards a few metres while Sims called an urgent dead
stop.
The three remaining Conquerors slewed up behind him.
Bouncing up to their rear, the Salamander formations drew out in a line abreast, the infantry herding in around
them. Shells from the three AT70s on the far side of the mine-field splashed all around them, chewing up the muddy
irrigation system of the farmland which had already been scored with deep furrows by the hurtling armour.
“Sweepers! Sweepers forward!” Rawne ordered into his vox. Two specialist squads of three, one led by
“Shoggy” Domor, the other by a Verghastite trooper named Burone, immediately went ahead under fire.
“Infantry units! Support!” Rawne yelled.
The Ghosts began firing at the edge of the town with lasrifles, and with the heavier infantry support weapons they
had brought up: four heavy stubbers and three missile launchers, plus the heavy bolters and the autocannons hullmounted
on the Salamanders.
The sweeper squads were miserably exposed, working their delicate magic as tank rounds and small arms fire
whooshed around them. They had the expertise to clear a corridor through the field… if they lived long enough.
The second front advance was now dangerously delayed.
More AT70s appeared in support of the existing trio, as well as a quartet of heavy Usurper self-propelleds. Sims
wondered just how much bloody armour the enemy had to draw on at Bhavnager.
Deadlocked by the mines, the four Conquerors began free-firing at the enemy position with main guns and coaxial
mounts. In the space of a few seconds, the Lion of Pardua comprehensively destroyed a self-propelled gun
thoroughly enough to ignite its munition pile, and the Lucky Bastard knocked out an AT70. The detonation of the selfpropelled
gun was severe enough to spray shrapnel out over the minefield and trigger a few of the buried munitions
off. The Say Your Prayers and Sirus’ Wrath of Pardua slung over some tank rounds that blew out the north retaining
wall of the temple. The Wrath’s driver and a Pardus tech-priest from the Salamanders took the opportunity to rig
running repairs on the Conqueror’s damaged track section.
In a shell-dug foxhole near to Rawne’s Salamander, Criid, Caffran and Mkillian prepped one of the foot support
missile launchers, known as “tread-fethers” in the regimental slang. It was a shoulder tube of khaki-painted metal
with a fore-scope, a trigger brace and fluted venturi at the back end to vent the recoil exhaust.
Heavy support weapons like this weren’t commonly deployed by the stealth-specialist Ghosts; in fact Bragg was
often the only trooper carrying one. But they were in the middle of a tank fight now. Caffran shouldered the tube and
aimed via the crude wire crosshairs at the AT70 that had duelled with the late, lamented Steel Storm. Like many
Ghosts, Caffran had become familiar with tread-fethers during the street-to-street war at Vervunhive, where he’d
used one to knock out five Zoican siege tanks.
In fact he’d been fielding one in the burning habs when Criid had turned up to save his life from Zoican storm
troops. They’d been together ever since.
Over the roar of the fighting, he heard her say “For Verghast” as she kissed the armed rocket-grenade Mkillian
handed to her. She slammed it into the launcher pipe.
“Loaded!” she yelled.
Caffran had his target. “Ease!” he ordered.
Everyone nearby echoed the word, so that their mouths would be open when the tube fired. Anyone with closed
mouths risked burst eardrums from the sudden firing pressure.
With a hollow, whistling cough, the tread-fether shot the rocket grenade at the enemy, leaving a slowly dissolving
con-trail of smoke behind it. The hit was clean, but the rocket exploded impotently off the heavy front armour of the
Reaver. As if goaded, the AT70 came around. “Load me!”
“Loaded!” Criid yelled. “Ease!”
Now that was better. The AT70 shuddered and began to burn. Its cannon muzzle drooped, as if the tank itself was
feigning death.
“Load me! Just to be sure!”
“Loaded!”
“Ease!”
The burning AT70 now shivered and exploded in a blizzard of machine parts, armour plating, track segments and
fire.A cheer rippled down the infantry lines. Then, above the ceaseless waning, the sound of another, louder cheer.
Rawne leapt out of his Salamander to investigate, running hunched as tracer fire crackled over his position.
Larkin had scored magnificently with his first shot of the engagement.
“I saw it for definite,” Trooper Cuu told Rawne excitedly, tapping his lasgun’s scope. “Larks got the officer, dead
as dead.”
At a distance of over three hundred metres, Larkin had put a hot-shot las round through the sighting grille of the
pulpit armour on one of the Usurpers and killed the artillery officer in charge. It was one hell of a shot.
“You go, Larks!” Trooper Neskon yelled. One of the unit’s flamer troopers, Neskon was reduced to firing his
laspistol, his flame-gun pretty much redundant in these mid — to long-range conditions.
“Could you do better closer?” Rawne asked Larkin.
“I’d feel better further away, major… like on another planet, maybe,” Larkin said sourly.
“I’m sure, but…”
“Yes, of course, sir!” Larkin said.
“Follow Domor’s team out into the field. Feygor? Form up a five-man intruder team around Larkin. Get another
sniper in there if you can. Move out down the swept corridor and give the sweeper boys cover. Use the reduced
range to do some real damage. I want officers and commanders picked out and killed.”
“Don’t we all, major,” replied Feygor as he leapt up to obey. The voice of Rawne’s adjutant had always been
deep and gravelly, but ever since the final fight for Veyveyr Gate, he’d spoken through a voicebox deformed and
twisted with las-burn scar tissue. He was permanently monotone and deadpan.
Feygor scrambled around and selected Cuu, Banda and the Verghast sniper Twenish to accompany himself and
Larkin.
Under the storm of fire, the quintet moved out into the killing field. Domor’s party, working alongside Burone’s,
had cleared a ten metre wide channel that ran thirty metres into the field, its edges carefully denoted by staked tapes
laid by Trooper Memmo. One of Burone’s squad was already dead and Mkor in Domor’s had taken shrapnel in his
left thigh and shoulder.
Domor’s team was slightly ahead of Burone’s, and this competition was a matter of pride between Tanith and
Verghastite minesweepers. Domor, of course, had the advantage of his heat-reading augmetic eyes to back up the
sweeper brooms.
Feygor’s intruder team joined them, Larkin and Twenish immediately digging in and sighting up as Cuu and Banda
gave them cover fire. The vulnerable sweepers were glad of the additional support.
“Couldn’t have brought a fat stub or a tread-fether with you, I suppose?” Domor asked.
“Just keep sweeping, Shoggy,” Feygor growled.
Twenish was a damn good shot, Larkin noted. He was one of the very few Verghastite newcomers to have
specialised in sniper school before the Act of Consolation. A long-limbed, humourless fellow, Twenish was ex-
Vervun Primary, a career soldier. His long-las was newer than Larkin’s nalwood-furnished beauty; a supremely
functional weapon with grotesquely enlarged night-scope array, a bipod stand and a ceramite stock individually
tailored to fit its user.
The two snipers, products of entirely diverging regimental schools and training, began firing at the enemy armour.
From three shots, Larkin dropped a Usurper gunlayer, an infantry leader, and the commander of an AT70 who had
made the mistake of spotting from his turret hatch.
Twenish fired in quick double-shots. If the first didn’t kill, it at least found range and drew his aim to his target for
the second. From three of these paired shots, he made two excellent kills, including an Infardi priest rousing his men
to combat. But to Larkin, it seemed like wasted effort. He knew about the double-shot method, and also was aware
that many guard regiments taught the approach as standard. In his opinion, it gave the enemy too much warning, no
matter how quickly you adjusted for the second squeeze.
As he lined up again, Larkin began to find the crack-pause-crack of Twenish’s routine off-putting. Twenish was
obsessive in his care, laying out a sheet of vizzy-cloth beside his firing position that he used to polish clean the
scope lenses between each double-shot. Like a fething machine… crack-pause-crack…. polish-polish… crackpause-
crack. Enough with the precious rituals! Larkin felt like yelling, though he had more than enough of his own.
Larkin snuggled in again and with one shot killed the driver of a halftrack that was moving into the opposition line.
Banda, Cuu and Feygor knelt in the folds of soil, blazing suppressing fire freely at the enemy.
Banda was an excellent shot, and like many of her kind — female Verghastite conscripts, that was — she had
wanted to specialise in marksmanship on joining the Ghosts. As it was, there was a strict limit on numbers for that
specialisation and she’d been denied, although, to Banda’s delight, her friend Nessa had made it. Most of the
marksman places went to Vervun Primary snipers like Twenish who were carrying their specialisation over into the
Ghosts with them. But Banda could shoot damn well, even with a standard, bulk-stamped las-rifle… a fact she’d
proved to the gak-ass Major Rawne in the Universitariat clearance.
A swathe of autogun fire rippled across the position of the sweepers and the intruder team and every one threw
themselves down. The remaining member of Burone’s team was shredded, and Burone himself was hit in the hip. As
they all got up again, Banda was first to realise that Twenish was dead; hammered into the soil in his prone position
by the stitching fire that had raked over them.
Without hesitating, she leapt forward and prised the Verghastite long-las from Twenish’s stiff grip.
“Do you know what you’re doing?” Larkin called to her.
“Yes, gak you very much, Mr Tanith sniper.”
She took aim. The stock, molded for Twenish’s longer reach, was awkward for her, but she persisted. This was a
long-las, gak it!
No double-shots for her. An Infardi artillery officer running from one Usurper to the other crossed her sighting
reticule and she blew his head off.
“Nice,” approved Larkin.
Banda smiled. And took an Infardi gunman off the balustrade of the temple at four hundred metres.
“Beat ’cha at yer own game, Larks,” Cuu simpered at Larkin. “Sure as sure.”
“Feth off,” said Larkin. He knew how brilliantly — if psychotically — Cuu could shoot. If Cuu wanted a piece of
it, let him get his belly dirty and use the damn long-las. At least Banda was eager. And damn good. He’d always
suspected that about her. Since the day he’d first met her at street junction 281/kl in the suburbs of Vervunhive. The
cheeky fething bitch.
As Domor’s squad continued forward with their unenviably deadly task, and a fresh sweeper team ran forward to
replace Burone’s unit, the two Ghost snipers plied their precise and murderous trade across the enemy positions.
“Three, one. We’re deadlocked!” Rawne told Gaunt via his Salamander’s powerful voxcaster set. “How long,
three?”
“At this rate, an hour before we’re even at the temple, one!”
“Continue as you are and await orders.”
South of Bhavnager, the infantry forces were swarming into the town itself on the smoking heels of the Pardus main
armour. Tanks were engaging the enemy at short range now, in the limiting spaces of the narrow market area streets.
Woll’s Old Strontium knocked out three N20 anti-tankers during this phase of close armour, and hit a Usurper
before it could train its huge tank-killing weapon down to fire.
Kloepas’ Heart of Destruction was caught in a firelight with two Reavers, and the Conquerors Xenophobe and
Tread Softly smashed down low corral walls and single-storey brick-built houses as they moved to support it.
The Executioner tank Strife, flanked by the Conquerors Beat the Retreat and P48J, crushed a squadron of
halftracks and broke into the compound of the south-western produce barns. Kolea’s troop spearhead swiftly moved
up to support them, enduring a series of fierce, close range fights through the echoing interiors of the barns. Mkoll’s
scout force pushed through towards the town centre marketplace after an ambiguous but deadly confrontation in the
yards of the warehouses, where bales of dried vines were stacked. A platoon under Corporal Meryn fought their way
in after them, meeting a counter-assault massed by fifty Infardi gunmen.
The flame-troopers, typified by Brostin and Dremmond and the Verghastite Lubba, excelled themselves during this
part of the fight, sweeping clean the hard-locked barns of any Infardi resistance.
Accompanied by Vox-officer Beltayn, Gaunt advanced through the promethium smoke and the fyceline discharge.
He took the handset from Beltayn as it was offered.
“One to seven!”
“Seven, one!” Sergeant Baffel’s replied, his voice eerily distorted by electromagnetics.
“Three’s counter-punch is deadlocked. We need to secure the fuel depot stat. I want you to push ahead and cut us a
way through. How do you feel about that?”
“Do our best, one.”
“One, seven. Acknowledged.”
Sergeant Baffels turned to his prong of the advance, as heavy shelling whipped over them.
“Orders just got interesting, people,” he said.
They groaned.
“What the gak are we expected to do now, Baffels?” asked Soric.
“Simple,” said Baffels. “Live or die. The fuel depot. Let’s look like we mean business.”
At waymark 00.60, standing amid the parked tankers, Chimeras, Trojans and troop trucks, they could hear the rumble
of battle from away through the trees at Bhavnager.
Varl’s defence section stood about aimlessly, talking with the waiting Munitorium drivers, smoking, cleaning kit.
Varl paced up and down. He so fething wanted to get down there and into it. This was a good duty and all, but
still…
“Sir?” Varl looked round. Trooper Unkin was approaching.
“Trooper?”
“He says he wants to advance.”
“Who does?”
“Him, sir.” Unkin pointed at the ragged old ayatani, Zweil. “I’ll deal,” Varl told his point man.
He wandered down to the old priest. “You have to stay here, father,” he said.
“I have to do no such thing,” Zweil replied. “In fact it’s my duty to get down there, on the path of the Ayolta Amad
Infardiri.”
“The what father?”
“The Pilgrim’s Way. There are pilgrims in need of my ministry.”
“There’s no such—”
A distant, powerful explosion shook the air. “I’m going, Sergeant Varl. Right now. To do less would be
desecration.”
Varl groaned as the elderly priest strode away from him and began heading down the highway through the fruit
groves towards Bhavnager. Gaunt would have Varl’s stripes if anything happened to the ayatani.
“Take over,” Varl told Unkin and began running after the retreating figure of the priest.
“Father! Father Zweil! Wait up!”
Caustic smoke was rolling down the length of the side street obscuring Kolea’s view. Somewhere down there,
somewhere close to the point where the street met the main through road just off the market square, an enemy
halftrack was sitting and chopping fire from its pintle-mount at anything that moved. Every now and then, it fired its
anti-tank gun too.
The wretched smoke was pouring out of a threshing mill close by. Las-fire whimpered down the thoroughfare. The
tightly packed buildings in the side street degraded vox-quality. It reminded Kolea rather too much of the fighting in
the outhabs of Vervunhive.
Corporal Meryn’s platoon, fresh from their firefight in the barns, moved up behind Kolea’s bunch. Kolea signalled
Meryn by hand to force a way through the buildings to the left and out onto the street running parallel to the one that
currently stymied the advance. Meryn acknowledged.
Bonin, one of the scouts, had peeled to the right and found a walk-through breezeway that opened onto a small
area of open wasteland behind the street buildings. Hearing this over the vox Kolea immediately sent Venar, Wheln,
Fenix and Jajjo through to link up with Bonin. Fenix carried a “tread-fether” in addition to his lasrifle.
From cover, Kolea continued to scrutinize the billowing smoke for signs of the gakking N20. After a while, he
began to fire off rounds into the section of smoke his instinct said concealed it. He was sure he could hear his shots
impacting off hull metal. A heavy burst of stub fire raked back in response, chewing into the rubble and debris on the
street. Almost immediately, it was followed by a whistling bang as the anti-tank weapon fired. The shell, travelling,
it seemed to Kolea, at head height, impacted explosively in a burnt-out hut behind Kolea’s position. As it sped
through the smoke, the projectile left behind a bizarre corkscrew wake pattern.
“Come forward, come forward, you bastard…” Kolea urged the ’track, under his breath.
“Confirmed foot targets!” the vox hiss came in his ear. Marksman Rilke, dug into cover close by Kolea, had seen
movement down by the burning mill. He’d challenged by vox using the day’s code word, in case it was some of their
own out of position and crossing the line of battle. No identifiers came back. Rilke lined up his long-las and began
firing.
Others in Kolea’s formation joined in: Ezlan and Mkoyn over a broken wall near Rilke; Livara, Viwo and Loglas
from the windows of a livery; the loom-girls Seena and Arilla from a fox hole to Kolea’s right. Las and auto fire
began to ripple down the street at them. Platoon-strength opposition at least.
Seena and Arilla formed, respectively, the gunner and loader of a heavy stubber team. They’d learned the skills in
the Vervun war, as part of one of the many “scratch” companies of the resistance. Seena was a plump, twenty-five
year old girl who wore a black slouch cap to keep her luxuriant bangs out of her eyes; Arilla was skinny, barely
eighteen.
Somehow it looked wrong for the frailer, shorter girl to always be the one lugging the hollow plasteel yoke laden
with ammo hoppers. But they were an excellent team. Their matt-black stubber was packed into the lip of the foxhole
tightly to prevent the tripod skating out during sustained fire. Those old-pattern stubbers could buck like a riled
auroch. Seena was squirting out tight bursts, interspersing them with longer salvoes that she sluiced from side to side
on the gunstand’s oiled gimbal.
Ezlan and Mkoyn tossed out a few tube-charges that detonated with satisfying thumps and collapsed the street
facade of a farrier’s shop.
Kolea got a few shots off himself, moving along the defence line. Another anti-tank round screamed low overhead.
Kolea hoped the infantry clash would bring the halftrack up in support of its troops. He got Loglas and Viwo to prep
their missile tube.
“Nine, seventeen?”
“Seventeen,” Meryn answered over the link. “What have you got?”
“Access to the next street. Looks quiet. Advancing.”
“Steady does it. Keep in vox-touch.”
A particularly heavy spray of las-fire stippled the wall behind him, and Kolea ducked flat. He heard the stubber
barking out in response.
“Nine, thirty-two?”
“Reading you, nine.”
“Any luck with that halftrack yet, Bonin?”
“We’re crossing the wasteground. Can’t find a route back onto the street to come in behind them. We… Hold on.”
Kolea tensed as he heard fierce shooting distorted by the vox.
“Thirty-two? Thirty-two?”
“…vy fire! Heavy fire in this area! Feth! We’ve got m—” Bonin’s response came back, chopped by the voxbounce
off the buildings.
“Nine, thirty-two. Say again! Nine, thirty-two!”
The channel just bled white noise. Kolea could hear staccato crossfire from behind the structures to his right.
Bonin’s fire-team needed help. More particularly, if they were overrun, Kolea needed to make sure the gap to his
flank was plugged.
“Nine, I require fire support here! Map-mark 51.33!”
Within two minutes, a platoon had moved up from the warehouses along the route his team had already cleared.
Kolea’s old friend Sergeant Haller was at the head of it. Kolea quickly outlined the situation and the suspected
position of the N20 to Haller and then grouped up a fire-team of Livara, Ezlan, Mkoyn and, from Haller’s detail,
Trooper Surch and the flamer-man Lubba.
“Take over here,” Kolea told Haller, and immediately led his ready-team right, down through the breezeway and
onto the open ground beyond.
As if it had been waiting for the Verghastite hero to go, the halftrack suddenly clanked forward through the pungent
brown smoke and fired its main mount at the Ghost line. Two of Haller’s new arrivals were killed and Loglas was
wounded by flying debris. Haller ran head-down through the rain of burning ash, and scooped up the missile tube as
Viwo got the dazed Loglas into cover.
“Loaded?” Haller yelled at Viwo.
“Hell, yes sir!” Viwo confirmed.
Haller sighted up. He put the crosshairs on the box-armoured view-slits of the N20’s cab. “Ease!”
The rocket tore open the halftrack’s cab armour like a can-opener, and exploded out with enough force to spin the
entire anti-tank mount around. Seena and Arilla hosed the stricken machine with stub-fire.
There was a ragged ripple of cheers from the Ghosts.
“Load me up again,” Haller told Viwo. “I want to make certain and kill it twice.”
Bonin’s advance team had run into ferocious and extraordinary opposition centring on a shell-damaged building at
the edge of the wasteground. More than twenty Infardi weapons had fired on them and then, incredibly, dozens of
green-clad warriors had charged out brandishing cleavers, pikes and rifle bayonets.
The five Ghosts reacted with extreme levels of improvisation. Fenix had been winged in the initial fire, but he
was still fit to fight, and dropped to his knees, presenting a smaller target as he fired at the mob rushing them. Wheln
and Venar had already fixed bayonets and countered directly, uttering blood-chilling yells as they drove forward,
slashing and impaling.
Bonin sprayed his lasgun on full auto, draining out the powercell swiftly but harvesting the opposition. Jajjo was
carrying the loaded tread-fether and decided not to waste the stopping power. Yelling “Ease!” he shouldered the tube
and fired the anti-tank round into the face of the building the Infardi had charged out of. The back-blast took out
several of the skirmishers and collapsed a section of the wall. Then Jajjo tossed his tube aside and leapt into the
close fighting, his silver blade in his hand.
His powercell depleted, Bonin joined in the hand to hand too, dubbing with his gunstock. The Imperials, trained
by the likes of Feygor and Mkoll at this sort of fighting, out-classed the cultists, despite the latter’s superior numbers
and bigger, slashing blades. But the Infardi had frenzy in them, and that made them lethal opponents.
Bonin broke a jaw with a swing of his lasgun, and then smacked the muzzle of his weapon into the solar plexus of
another attacker. What the feth had made them charge out like this, he wondered? It was bizarre, even by the
unpredictable standards of the Chaos-polluted foe. They had cover and they clearly had guns. They could have taken
Bonin’s intruder unit in the open.
The brutal melee lasted for four minutes and only ended when the last of the Infardi were dead or unconscious.
Bonin’s team were all splashed with the enemy’s gore and the wasteground was soaked. Corpses sprawled all
around. The Ghosts had all sustained cuts and contusions: Bonin had a particularly deep laceration across his left
upper arm and Jajjo had a broken wrist.
“What the hell was that about?” Venar groaned, stooping over, out of breath.
Bonin could feel the adrenalin surging through his body, the rushing beat of his own heart. He knew his team must
be feeling the same way too, and wanted to use it before they ebbed out of that intense combat edge. He slammed a
fresh powercell into his weapon.
“Don’t know but I want to know,” he told Venar. “Let’s get in there and secure the damn place fast. Jajjo, use your
pistol. Wheln, carry the tread-fether.”
Fenix suddenly switched round at movement behind them, but it was Kolea’s support section.
“Gak me!” said Kolea, looking at the bloody evidence of the fight. “They charge you?”
“Like fething maniacs, sir,” Bonin said, pausing to put a las-round through the head of a stirring Infardi.
“From there?”
Bonin nodded.
“Protecting something?” Ezlan suggested. “Let’s find out,” said Kolea.
“Fenix, get yourself and Jajjo back to the rear and find medics. Bonin, Lubba, you’ve got point.”
The nine men advanced into the min through the hole Jajjo’s rocket had made.
Lubba’s flamer stuttered and then surged cones of fire into the dark spaces.
They found the Infardi troop leader sprawled unconscious amid the blast damage. His personal force shield had
been overwhelmed by the rocket blast, and the portable generator pack lay shattered nearby.
He’d sent his men out in a suicidal charge to cover his own escape.
Kolea looked down at the unconscious man. Tall, wiry, with a shaved head and a pot belly, his unhealthy skin was
covered with unholy symbols. Bonin was about to finish him with his silver blade but Kolea stopped him. “Vox the
chief. Ask him if he wants a prisoner.”
In the next street over, Meryn’s unit had caught up with Mkoll’s scout section and they moved forward together. The
sounds of close fighting rolled in from the neighbouring street, but Haller had informed Meryn that the N20 had been
killed and advised him to press on.
Night was now falling fast, and the darkening sky was lit all around by firelight, the flashes of explosions and the
glimmer of tracers. By Mkoll’s guess, the fight was not yet even half done. The Tanith were still a long way from
taking Bhavnager or securing their primary objective, the fuel depot.
Strangely, the street they advanced down, a narrow lane lined with empty dwellings and plundered trading posts,
was untouched by the fighting, intact, almost peaceful.
Mkoll wished urgently for full darkness. This phase of the day when light turned into night was murder on the
eyes. Night vision refused to settle in. The bright moons were up, shrouded by palls of rising smoke that turned them
blood red.
Meryn suddenly made a movement and fired. Swiftly, all the Ghosts opened up, moving into secure cover. Odd
bursts of gunfire came back at them, chipping the bricks and stucco walls of the commonplace buildings.
Then something made a whooping bang and a building to Meryn’s left dissolved in a fireball that took two Ghosts
with it.
“Armour! Armour!”
Squat and ominous like a brooding toad, the AT70 crumpled a fence as it rolled out onto the road, traversing its
turret to fire down on them again. The blast destroyed another house.
“Missile tube to order!” Meryn yelled as brick chips drizzled down over him.
“Firing jam! Firing jam!”
“Feth!” Meryn growled. The one tool they had that might make a dent in the tank was down. They were caught
cold.
Infardi troops streamed in behind the Reaver, blasting away. A serious small arms firefight developed, lighting up
the dim street with its strobing brilliance.
The tank rolled on, crashing heedlessly over the dead or wounded forms of its own foot troops. Meryn shuddered.
It would soon be doing the same to his boys.
From his position, he could hear Mkoll urgently talking over the vox. He waited until Mkoll broke off before
patching in. “Seventeen, four. Do we fall back?”
“Four, seventeen. See if we can hold out a few minutes more. We can’t let these infantry numbers in at our flank.”
“Understood. What about the tank?”
“Let me worry about that.”
Easy for Mkoll to say, Meryn thought. The tank was barely seventy metres away now, its 105-mil barrel lowered
to maximum declension. It fired again, putting a crater in the road, and its coaxial weapon began chattering. Meryn
heard two Ghosts cry out as they were hit by the spray of bolter rounds. The Infardi troops were moving up all
around. This was turning into a full-on counter thrust Meryn wondered what the feth Mkoll intended to do about the
tank. He hoped it wasn’t some insane, suicidal ran with a satchel of tube-charges. Even Mkoll wouldn’t be that
crazy, would he? Then again, he hoped Mkoll had something up his guard-issue sleeve. The AT70 was going to be
all over them in a moment.
His vox crackled. “Infantry units, brace and cover for support.”
What the feth…?
A horizontal column of light, as thick as Meryn’s own thigh, raked down the narrow street from the rear. It was so
bright its afterimage seared Meryn’s retinas for minutes afterwards. There was a stink of ozone.
The AT70 blew up.
Its turret and main gun, spinning like a child’s discarded rattle, separated from the hull in the fireball and
demolished the upper storey of a house. The hull itself split open like a roasting nalnut shell in a campfire and
showered flames and metal fragments everywhere.
“Feth me!” Meryn stammered.
“Moving up, stand aside,” the vox said.
LeGuin’s Grey Venger rolled up the street a dark predatory shape, unlit.
“Drinks are on me,” Meryn heard Mkoll vox to the tank. “Hold you to that. Form up and follow me in. Let’s get
this finished.”
The Ghosts moved out of cover and ran up behind the advancing tank destroyer, firing suppression bursts into the
surrounding houses. The Venger crunched over the remains of the Reaver. The Infardi were in flight.
Meryn smiled. In a second, the flow of battle had completely reversed. Now they were the ones advancing with a
tank.
Half a kilometre away, the Heart of Destruction and the P48J finally broke through into the market place. Their
steady advance had been delayed for a while by a trio of N20s, and the Heart’s hull carried the blackened scars of
that clash.
Kleopas looked away from the prismatic up-scope for the first time in what seemed like hours. “Load?” he asked.
“Down to the last twenty,” his gun layer said after checking the shells left in the water-jacketted magazine.
Small arms fire began to rattle off the mantlet. Kleopas scoped around and identified at least three fire-teams of
Infardi troops on the northern side of the market place. The two Conquerors smashed forward through the empty
wooden market stalls, shattering them and tearing off the canvas awnings. P48J dragged one like a pennant.
The Heart’s gun-team loaded and layed at one of the enemy fire-teams.
“Don’t waste a shell on soft targets, we’re low on ammo,” Kleopas growled. He pulled open a fire-control lever
and aimed up the coaxial bolter. The heavy cannon destroyed one Infardi position in a blizzard of dust. The P48J
followed suit — she must be running low on shells too, Kleopas decided darkly — and between them, the armoured
pair pulverised the outclassed foot troops.
Kleopas’ auspex suddenly showed two fast-moving blips. A pair of Urdeshi-made light tanks, SteG 4s, each
bouncing along on three pairs of massive tyres, sped into the square, headlamps blazing. Their tiny turrets mounted
only sticklike 40-mil cannons, but if they had tungsten-cored ammo, or discarding sabots, they might still hurt the
hefty Imperial machines.
“Lay up on that one,” said Kleopas, indicating his backlit target screen as he checked the up-scope. “Now we use
our muscle.”
Sergeant Baffels felt he was under intense pressure to perform. He was sweating profusely and he felt sick. The
ferocious combat was bad enough, but he’d seen plenty of that before. It was the command responsibility that
troubled him.
His eastern prong of the infantry assault had pushed up through Bhavnager far enough to cross the main highway.
Now, with the temple on their right, they fought through the streets north of the market towards the fuel depot. Gaunt
himself had charged Baffels with clearing the route to the depot. He would not fail, Baffels told himself.
The colonel-commissar had given him squad command on Verghast. He didn’t want it much, but he appreciated the
honour of it every waking moment. Now Gaunt had tasked him with the battle’s crucial phase. It was an almost
impossibly heavy burden to carry.
Almost a thousand Ghosts were pouring into the town behind him, platoon supporting platoon. The original plan
had been that they, and a similar number under Kolea, would drive open, parallel wounds into Bhavnager’s defences
and crack the place wide, while Rawne took the northern depot. Now with both Kolea and Rawne basically bogged
down, it was down to him.
Baffels thought about Kolea a lot, usually with envy tingeing his mood. Kolea, the great war hero, took to
command so effortlessly. The troops loved him. They would do anything for him. To be fair, Baffels had never seen a
trooper disobey one of his own orders, but he felt unworthy. Until Vervunhive, he’d been a common dog-soldier too.
Why the feth should they do as he told them?
He thought about Milo too. Milo, his friend, his squad buddy. Milo should have had this command, he often
thought.
Baffels’ brigade had struggled up through the streets cast of the market, winning every metre hard. Baffels had
Commissar Hark with him, but he wasn’t sure Hark helped much. The men were afraid of him, and suspected him of
all sorts of dreadful motives. It was good to have a healthy fear of commissars, Baffels knew that much. That’s what
commissars were there for. And the regiment’s new commissar, give him his due, was doing his job and doing it
well. As he had proved the day before during the ambush, Hark was almost unflappable and he had a confident and
agile grasp of field tactics. Not only was he urging the rear portions of Baffel’s group on, he was directing and
focussing their efforts in a way that entirely complemented the sergeant’s lead.
But Baffels could tell that the men despised Hark. Despised what he stood for. Baffels knew this because it was
how he felt himself. Hark was Lugo’s agent. He was here to orchestrate Gaunt’s demise.
The leading edge of Baffels’ assault had run into especially fierce fighting at an intersection between the
abandoned halls of an esholi school and the market’s livestock pens. Despite monumental efforts by Soric’s platoon,
they had lodged tight, coming under heavy fire from N20 halftracks and several curious, six-wheeled light tanks.
Hark, picking out a squad of Nehn, Mkendrick, Raess, Vulli, Muril, Tokar, Cown and Garond, had attempted to
leap-frog Soric’s unit and break the deadlock. They found themselves pinned down almost immediately.
Then, more by luck than plan, Pardus armour tore up through the eastern roadway to support them — the
Executioner Strife, the Conquerors Tread Softly and Old Strontium, the Destroyer Death Jester. Between them, they
made a terrific mess of the north-eastern streets and left burning tank and light tank carcasses in their wake. Baffels
moved his forces in behind them as they made the last push to the depot, just a few streets away. It had been bloody
and slow, but Baffels had done what Gaunt had asked of him.
The delay had given Gaunt himself the opportunity to move up with the front. Baffels was almost overjoyed to see
him and Hark immediately deferred to the colonel-commissar.
Gaunt approached Baffels’ position as enemy las-fire crisscrossed the night air.
“You’ve done a fine job,” Gaunt told the sergeant. “It’s taken fething ages I’m afraid, sir,” Baffels countered. “It
was going to. The Ershul aren’t giving up without a fight.”
“Ershul, sir?”
“A word ayatani Zweil taught me this afternoon. Smell that?”
“I do, sir,” said Baffels, scenting the stink of promethium fuel on the wind. “Let’s go finish it,” Gaunt said.
Supported by the blistering firepower of the Pardus, the Ghosts moved forward towards the depot. Leading one
line, Gaunt found himself suddenly face to face with Infardi who had laid low and dug in, now springing out in
ambush to the file. His power sword sang and his bolter spat. Around him, Uril, Harjeon, Soric and Lillo, some of
the best of the Verghastite new blood, proved themselves worthy Ghosts. It was the first of seventeen separate handto-
hand engagements the prong would encounter on the way up.
At the fifth, a messy firefight to clear a oil de sac, chance brought Gaunt and Hark up side by side in the mayhem.
Hark’s plasma pistol seared into the shadows.
“I’ll say this, Gaunt… you fight a good fight.”
“Whatever. The Emperor protects,” Gaunt murmured, decapitating a charging Infardi with the power sword of
House Sondar.
“You still don’t trust me, do you?” Hark said, destroying an enemy stub-nest with a single, volatile beam.
“Are you really very surprised?” Gaunt replied tardy and, without waiting for a response, rallied his Ghosts for
the next assault.
Sergeant Bray was the first platoon leader in Baffels’ group to break his men through to the fuel depot proper. He
found a row of massive sheds and chubby fuel tanks, guarded by over a hundred dug-in Infardi, supported by three
AT70s and a pair of Usurpers.
Bray’s rocket teams got busy. This was the heaviest resistance they’d yet encountered, and the attack had hardly
been a picnic up until then. Bray called up for armour support.
Gaunt, Baffels, Soric and Hark clawed in, each driving a solid formation of Ghosts up to the rear of Bray’s
position. Gaunt could taste victory, and defeat too, intertwined. Experience told him that this was the moment, the
make or break. If they endured and pushed on, they would win the town and destroy the foe. If not…
Shell, las and hard-round fire whipped into his formation. He saw the Pardus go forward, smashing through chainlink
fences and across ditches as they breached the depot compound. Strife killed a Usurper, and Death Jester
crippled a Reaver. The night sky was underlit by a storm of explosions and tracers.
“Regroup! Regroup!” Baffels was yelling as the shells scourged the air. Soric’s section made gains, charging in
through the southern fence, before being driven back by heavy fire from Infardi troops. Hark’s section was backed
into a corner.
Gaunt saw the Baneblade before anyone else.
His blood ran cold.
Three hundred tonnes of super-heavy tank, a captured, corrupted Imperial machine. It trundled casually out from
behind the depot, its massive turret weapon rising.
A monster. A steel-shod monster from the mouth of hell.
“Baneblade! Enemy Baneblade at 61.78!” Gaunt yelled into his vox. Captain Woll, commanding the Old
Strontium, couldn’t believe his ears.
His auspex picked up the behemoth a second before it fired and obliterated the Conqueror Tread Softly.
Woll layed in and fired, but his tank round barely made a dent on the massive machine’s hull.
The Baneblade’s secondary and sponson turrets began to fire on the Imperial positions. The immediate death toll
was hideous. Staunch, loyal Ghosts broke in terror and ran as the Baneblade rolled forward.
“Stand true! Stand true, you worthless dogs!” Hark yelled at the fleeing Tanith around him. “This is the Emperor’s
work! Stand true or face his wrath at my hand!”
Hark was suddenly jerked backwards as Gaunt seized his wrist tightly and spoiled the threatened aim of his
plasma pistol.
“I punish the Ghosts. Me. Not you. Besides, it’s a fething Baneblade, you moron. I’d be running too. Now, help
me.”
Soric’s and Bray’s sections hurled anti-tank missiles at the looming giant to no great avail. Death Jester hit it with
two blinding shots and still it rolled on. The Infardi armour and infantry advanced behind it.
Gaunt realised he had been right. This had been the moment. The make or break.
And they had broken.
Weapons thumping and spitting, the Infardi Baneblade drove the Tanith First into abject retreat Baffels would not
let go. He was still determined to prove Gaunt right in selecting him for command. He was going to win this, he was
going to take the target. He was—
As men fled around him, he grabbed a fallen tread-fether, loaded up a rocket and took aim on the monster tank. It
was less than twenty metres away now, a giant, fire-spitting dragon that blotted out the stars.
Baffels locked the crosshairs on a slit window near what he assumed was the driver’s position. He held the tube
steady and fired.
There was a bright blast of flame and for one jubilant moment, Baffels thought he’d been successful. That he’d
become a hero like fething Gol Kolea.
But the Baneblade was barely bruised. One of its secondary coaxial cannons killed Baffels with a brief spurt of
shots.
Rawne’s counter punch finally reached the Bhavnager temple at nine thirty-five. It was dark by then, and the town
was alive with firestorms and shooting.
Their slow progression through the minefield had sped up when Larkin and Domor had hit upon an improvised
plan. Domor’s augmetic eyes could pick out many mines just under the soil surface. He talked Larkin onto them and
Larkin and Banda then set them off with pinpoint shots.
The sweepers had advanced another thirty metres and by that time, with the sun gone, Sims’ tank mob had dealt
with the opposition armour. Then the tanks rolled in down the channel Domor had cleared, and lowered their combat
dozer blades to clear the last few metres now they were no longer under fire.
The temple was a mess. Golden fish-scale tiles trickled off the burst dome of the once glorious stupa. Incendiary
shells burned in the main nave. Prayer flags smouldered and twitched in the breeze.
The counter punch drove in at last towards the fuel depot from the east.
Captain Sirus, his tracks now repaired, thundered forward in the Wrath of Pardua. He had heard the strangled,
unbelievable transmission from the southern front that they’d met a Baneblade.
If it was true, he wanted a piece of that. Something Woll could never beat.
The Wrath of Pardua came at the enemy Baneblade in the open space of the depot field. Sensing the Wrath by
auspex, the Baneblade had begun to rum.
Sims loaded augur shells, armour busters, into his breech, and punched two penetrating holes in the massive
enemy tank’s mantlet. Few Pardus tank commanders carried augur shells as a matter of course, because few ever
expected to meet something genuinely tougher than themselves. Sims was a philosophically tactical man. He was
happy to sacrifice a few valuable places in his magazine for augur shells, just in case.
Now the trick was to target the holes made by the augurs and blow the enemy out from the inside with a hi-ex tank
round.
The wounded Baneblade traversed its turret, locked on to the Wrath of Pardua, and destroyed it with a single shot
from its main weapon.
Sims was laughing in victory as he was incinerated. An instant. An instant of success all tank masters dream of.
He had wounded the beast. He could die now.
The Wrath of Pardua exploded, skipping armour chips out around itself in the blast wake.
Old Strontium purred out from behind the shattered buildings south of the depot. Woll had never carried augur
rounds as standard, like Sims. But he was damn well going to use the advantage. Ignoring his auspex and sighting
only by eye, referring to his rangefinder and crosswind indicator, Woll punched a hi-ex shell through one of the
profound holes Sirus had made in the Baneblade’s armour. There was a brief pause.
Then the super-heavy tank blew itself to pieces in a titanic eruption of heat and noise and light.
Gaunt and Soric, with the help of Hark and the squad leaders, managed to slow the Ghosts’ panic and bring them
around towards the fuel depot. Soric himself led the charge back down the yard towards the depot past the flaming
remains of the Baneblade.
By then, Rawne’s counter punch had chased in after the valiant Wrath of Pardua, and was cleaning out the last
Infardi in the depot. It was a running gun-battle, and Rawne knew he had time to make up.
He vox-signalled seizure of the depot just before eleven.
Surviving Infardi elements fled north into the rainwoods beyond Bhavnager. The town was now in Imperial hands.
As the medics moved around him in the smoke-stained night Gaunt found ayatani Zweil kneeling over the ruptured
corpse of Sergeant Baffels. Sergeant Varl stood attentively nearby, watching.
“Sorry, chief. He insisted. He wanted to be here,” Varl told Gaunt.
Gaunt nodded. “Thanks for looking after him, Varl.” Gaunt walked over to Zweil.
“This man is a special loss,” Zweil said, turning to rise and face Gaunt. “His efforts were crucial here.”
“Did someone tell you that or do you just feel that father?”
“The latter… Am I wrong?”
“No, not at all. Baffels led the way to the depot. He did his duty, beyond his duty. I could not have asked for
more.”
Zweil closed Baffels’ clouded eyes.
“I felt as much. Well, it’s over now,” he said. “Sleep well, pilgrim. Your journey’s done.”
ELEVEN
THE RAINWOODS
“Though my tears be as many as the spots of rain Falling in the Hagian woods, One for every fallen soul, loyal
to the Throne There would not be enough.”
—Gospel of Saint Sabbat, Psalms II VII.
Under cover of darkness, the sky lit up, over a hundred and fifty kilometres away. Flashes, sudden flares, spits of
light, accompanied by the very distant judder of thunder.
Once it had been going on for an hour, they all agreed it wasn’t a storm.
“Full-scale action,” Corbec murmured.
“That’s one feth of a fight,” Bragg agreed.
They stood in the dark, at the edge of the holy river, inserts chorusing around them, as Greer and Daur worked on
the engine.
“What I wouldn’t give…” Derin began, and then shut up. “I know what you mean, son,” said Corbec.
“Bhavnager,” said Milo, joining them with a flashlight and an open chart-slate. “Where, boy?”
“Bhavnager. Farming town, in the approach to the foothills.” Milo showed Corbec the area on the chart.
“It was meant to be our second night stop,” he said. “There’s a fuel depot there.”
An especially big flash underlit the clouds.
“Feth!” said Bragg.
“Bad news for some poor bastard,” said Derin. “Let’s hope it was one of theirs,” said Corbec.
Dorden had walked away down to the river, and stood casting stones aimlessly into the inky water.
He started as someone came up beside him in the close dark. It was the esholi, Sanian.
“You are no fighter, I know that,” she said.
“What?”
“I worked with the lady Curth. I saw you. A medic.”
“That’s me, girl,” Dorden smiled.
“You are old.”
“Oh, thanks a bunch!”
“No, you are old. On Hagia, that is a mark of respect.”
“It is?”
“It shows you have wisdom. That, if you haven’t wasted your life, you have used it to collect up learning.”
“I’m pretty sure I haven’t wasted my life, Sanian.”
“I feel like I have.”
He looked round at her. She was a shadow, a silhouette staring down into the river, “What?”
“What am I? A learner? A student? All my life I have studied books and gospels… and now my world ends in ruin
and war. The saint doesn’t watch over us. I see men like Corbec, Daur, even a young man like Brin. They scold
themselves because all they have learned is the art of war. But war is what matters. Here. On Hagia, now. But for the
art of war-making, there is nothing.”
“There’s more to life than—”
“There is not, doctor. The Imperium is great, its wonders are manifold, but what of it would remain but for war?
Its people? Its learning? Its culture? Its language? Nothing. War encompasses all. In this time, there is only war.”
Dorden sighed. She was right. After a fashion.
“War has found Bhavnager,” she remarked, looking briefly at the flashes underlighting the distant clouds.
“You know the place?”
“I was born there and raised there. I left there to become esholi and find my way. Now, even if my way in life is
revealed to me, there will be nothing for me to return home to, when this is done. Because it will never be done. War
is eternal. It is only mankind that is finite.”
“Nothing on the vox,” Vamberfeld said.
Corbec nodded. “You’ve tried all channels?”
“Yes sir. It’s dead. I don’t know if it’s dead because we’re out of range or because the Chimera’s vox-caster is a
pile of junk.”
“We’ll never know,” said Derin.
Vamberfeld sat down on a tree stump at the edge of the road. Rain was in the air, and a true storm was gathering in
defiance of the man-made one to the west. The wind stirred their hair and the first few spats of rain dropped around
them.
Under the raised cowling of the Chimera, Daur and Greer worked at the engines.
Vamberfeld could hear Corbec talking to Milo just a few steps away from where he sat. It would be, he supposed,
the easiest thing in the world just to stand up, get the colonel’s attention, and talk to him, man to man.
The easiest thing…
He couldn’t do it.
Even now, he could feel the terror crawling back into him, in through his pores, in through his veins, squirming
and slithering down along his gut and up into the recesses of his mind. He began to shake.
It was so unfair. On Verghast in the towering hive he’d enjoyed a quiet life working as Guilder Naslquey’s
personal clerk in the commercia, signing dockets, arranging manifests, chasing promissory notes. He’d been good at
that. He’d lived in a decent little hab on Spine Low-231, with a promise of status promotion. He’d been very much
in love with his fiancée, an apprentice seamstress with Bocider’s.
Then the Zoican War had taken it all away. His job, his little hab, to an artillery shell; his fiancée to…
Well, he didn’t know what. He’d never been able to find out what had happened to his clear, sweet little
seamstress.
And that was all terrible. He’d lived through days and nights of fear, of hiding in ruins, of running scared, of
starving. But he’d lived through them, and come out sane.
Because of that, he’d decided he was man enough to turn his back on the ruins of his life and join the Imperial
Guard when the Act of Consolation made that possible. It had felt like the right thing to do.
He’d known fear during the war, and renewed the acquaintance again. The fear of leaving Verghast, never to
return. The anxiety of warp travel in a stinking, confined troop ship. The trepidation of failing during the bonewearying
first week of Fundamental and Preparatory.
The true terror, the unexpected terror had come later. The first time, wriggling and chuckling at the back of his
scalp, during the Hagia mass landings. He’d shaken it off. He’d been through hell on Verghast, he told himself. This
was just the same kind of hell.
Then it had come again, in the first phase of the assault on the Doctrinopolis. In real fighting, for the first time, as a
real soldier. Men died alongside him or, worse still as it seemed to Vamberfeld, were dismembered or hideously
mutilated by war. Those first few days had left him shaking inside. The terror would not now leave him alone. It
simply subsided a little between engagements.
Vamberfeld had decided that he needed to kill. To make a kill, as a soldier, to exorcise his terror. The chance had
finally come when he’d been with Gaunt as they breached the Universitariat from across the Square of Sublime
Tranquillity. To be baptised in war, to be badged in blood. He had been willing, and eager. He had wanted combat.
He had wanted relief from the terror-daemon that was by then riding his back all the time.
But it had only made things worse.
He’d come out of that encounter shaking like an idiot, unable to focus or talk. He’d come out a total slave to that
daemon.
It was so bloody unfair.
Bragg and Derin had recruited him from the hospital wards for this mission. He could hardly have refused them…
he was able-bodied and that made him useful. No one seemed to see the cackling, oil-black terror clinging to him.
Bragg and Derin had said Corbec had an important mission, and that was alright. Vamberfeld liked the colonel. It
seemed vital. The colonel had talked about holy missions and visions. That was fine too. It had been easy for
Vamberfeld to play along with that. Easy to pass off his nervousness and pretend the saint had spoken to him as well,
and ear-marked him for the task.
It was all a sham. He was just saying what he thought they wanted to hear. The only thing that really spoke to him
was the cackling daemon.
The words of the driver, Greer, had alarmed him. His talk of gold, of complicity with Captain Daur. Vamberfeld
wondered if they were all mocking him. He was now pretty sure they were all bastard-mercenaries, breaking orders
not because of some lofty, holy ideal but because of a base lust for wealth. And so he felt a fool for acting the part of
the dutiful visionary.
His hands shook. He tucked them into his pockets in the hope that no one would see. His body shook. His mind
shook. The terror consumed him. He cursed the daemon for fooling him into throwing in with a band of deserters and
thieves. He cursed the daemon for making him shake. He cursed the daemon for being there at all.
He wanted to get up and tell Corbec about his terror, but he was shaking so much he couldn’t.
And even if he could, he knew they’d most likely laugh in his face and shoot him in the bushes.
“Drink?”
“What?” Vamberfeld snapped around.
“Fancy a drink?” Bragg ask, offering him an open flask of the Tanith’s powerful sacra.
“No.”
“You look like you could use some, Vambs,” Bragg said genially.
“No.”
“Okay,” said Bragg, taking a sip himself and smacking his lips in relish.
Vamberfeld realised the rain was falling hard now, bouncing off his face and shoulders.
“You should get in,” Bragg observed. “It’s coming down in buckets.”
“I will. In a minute. I’m okay.”
“Okay,” said the big Tanith, moving away.
Warm rainwater began to leak down Vamberfeld’s neckline and over his wrists. He turned his face up to look into
the downpour, wishing that it would wash the terror away.
“Something’s up with the hive-boy, chief,” Bragg said to Corbec, passing him the flask.
Corbec took a deep swig of the biting liquor and used it to swallow a handful more painkillers. He was sucking in
way too many of them, he knew. He hurt so, he needed them. Corbec followed Bragg’s gesture and looked across the
rain-pelted road at the figure seated with its back to them. “I know, Bragg,” he said. “Do me a favour. Keep an eye
on him for me, would you?”
“So… How much?” whispered Greer, tightening a piston nut.
“How much what?” replied Daur. He was soaked by the rain now.
“Don’t make me say it, Verghast… The gold!”
“Oh, that. Keep your voice down. We don’t want the others hearing.”
“But it’s a lot, right? You promised a lot.”
“You can’t imagine the amount.”
Greer smiled, and wiped the rain off his face with a cuff that stained the streaks of water running down his brow
with machine oil.
“You haven’t told the rest, then?”
“Ah… Just enough to get them interested.”
“You gonna cut them out when the time comes?”
“Well, I’m considering it.”
“You can count on me, Verghast, time comes… If I can count on you, that is.”
“Oh, yeah. Of course. But look for my signal before you do anything.”
“Got it.”
“Greer, you will wait for my signal, won’t you?” Greer grinned. “Absolutely, cap. This is your monkey-show. You
call the play.”
“Slow down, girl, slow down!” Corbec smiled, sheltering from the rain under the open hatch of the Chimera. Her
hand signs were too quick for him as usual.
Is the saint really calling to you? Nessa signed, more slowly this time.
“Feth, I don’t know! Something is…” Corbec had still not truly mastered the sign codes used by the Verghastites,
though he’d tried hard. He knew his clumsy gestures only conveyed the pigeon-essence of his words.
Captain Daur says he has heard her, she signed expressively. He says you and the doctor have too.
“Maybe, Nessa.”
Are we wrong?
“I’m sorry, what? Are we wrong?”
Yes. She looked up at him, her face running with rainwater, her eyes bright.
“Wrong in what way?”
To be here. To be doing this.
“No, we’re not. Believe that much at least.”
Only his hand shook now. His left hand. By force of will, Vamberfeld had focused all the terror and the shakes down
into that one extremity. He could breathe again. He was controlling it.
Down the track, through the heavy rain, he saw something stir in the darkness. He knew he should reach for his
weapon or cry out, but he didn’t dare in case it let the shaking spill out through him again.
The movement resolved and became visible for a second. Two yearling chelon calves, no higher than a man’s
knee, waddling down the muddy track towards them.
And then a girl, aged twelve or thirteen, dressed in the dingy robes of the peasant caste, rounding the calves in
with her crook.
She pulled them back before they came too close to the parked Imperial transport. Just a smudge in the rainy night.
A peasant girl, bringing in her herd, trying not to risk contact with the soldiers driving through her pastures.
Vamberfeld stared at her in fascination. Her eyes came up and found his.
So young. So very grimy and spattered with mud. Her eyes piercing and…
The Chimera roared into life, engines turning and racing and spitting exhaust. Vapour streamed up into the rainfall
in thick geysers of steam. The main lamps and headlights burst into life.
“Mount up! Mount up!” Corbec yelled, calling them all back to the repaired transport.
Vamberfeld woke up suddenly, finding himself lying on his side in the rain-pounded mud. He’d passed out and
fallen from the tree stump. He got to his feet weak and shivering, fumbled for his gun and ran back towards the
brightly lit transport.
He cast a final look back into the dark trees. The girl and her chelons had vanished.
But the daemon was still there.
Pulling his shaking hand into his jacket to hide it, he climbed into the Chimera.
Daybreak, streaming rain in lament over the smoking battleground, came up on Bhavnager.
Waking early in his tent, Gaunt leapt up suddenly and then remembered the battle was done. He sat back on the tan
canvas seat of his folding stool and sighed. A half-empty bottle of amasec sat on the map table nearby. He began to
reach for it and then decided not to.
Beyond his tent, he heard the grumble of tank engines being overhauled by the tech-priests. He heard the clank of
the fuel bowsers as they replenished the transports. He heard the whine of hoists as tank magazines were reloaded
from the Chimeras. He heard the moan of the wounded in Curth’s makeshift infirmary.
Vox-officer Beltayn stuck his head in through the tent flap cautiously. “Oh five hundred, sir,” he said.
Gaunt nodded distractedly. He got up, pulling off his blood-, soot- and oil-streaked vest replacing it with a fresh
one from his kit The braces of his uniform pants dangling loose around his hips, he washed his face with handfuls of
water from the jug and then slipped the braces up, putting on a shirt and his black dolman jacket with its rows of gold
buttons and froggjng.
Bhavnager. What a victory. What a loss.
He was still shaking from the combat, from the ebbing adrenalin and the weariness.
He had slept for about three hours, and that fitfully. Mad dreams, confused dreams, dreams spawned by extreme
fatigue and the memories of what he had been through.
He had seen himself on a narrow shelf of ice, with the world far below, clinging on, about to fall, hurricanes of
fire falling around him.
Sergeant Baffels had appeared, alive and whole. He’d been on the lip of ice, and had reached over to grab
Gaunt’s hands. He’d pulled Gaunt up, onto solid ground.
“Baffels…” he’d managed to gasp out, frozen to the marrow.
Baffels had smiled, just before he’d vanished.
“Sabbat Martyr,” he’d said.
Gaunt grabbed the bottle and poured a deep measure into his dirty shot glass. He swigged it down.
“Now the ghosts of Ghosts are haunting me,” he murmured to himself.
Under Kolea’s instruction, the honour guard buried their dead — almost two hundred of them — in a mass grave
beside the temple at Bhavnager. The Trojans could have dug the pit but the Pardus Conquerors Old Strontium, Beat
the Retreat, P48J and Heart of Destruction did the honours with their dozer blades, even though their crews were
half dead with fatigue. Ayatani Zweil was prevailed upon to make the service of the dead. The Ghosts dutifully
staked small crosses cut from ghylum wood in rows across the turned earth, one for each of the dead who slept
beneath.
The day came up, warm, muggy and blighted with heavy rain. Gaunt knew it would take weeks for a unit to recover
from the shock of an action as fundamentally brutal as Bhavnager, but he didn’t have weeks. He barely had days.
At nine in the morning, he called the honour guard to order for an hour’s prep and sent the Recon Spear out in
advance into the rainwoods above the town. Though tired, the men in his command seemed generally to be in good
spirits. A solid victory, and against such odds, would do that, despite the losses. The Pardus were more sombre than
the Ghosts: they seemed more to be mourning the beloved machines they’d lost rather than the men.
Gaunt crossed the town square and stopped by a small timber store where Troopers Cocoer, Waed and Garond
were guarding the Infardi officer Bonin’s squad had taken the night before. No other Infardi troops had been taken
alive. Gaunt presumed that was because the Infardi took their wounded with them or killed them.
The vile, tattooed thing was chained up like a canid at the back of the shed. “Anything from him?”
“No sir,” said Waed.
Rawne and Feygor had made a preliminary attempt at interrogation the previous night, after the fight, but the
prisoner hadn’t responded.
“Get him ready for shipping. We’ll take him with us.”
Gaunt walked up towards the depot. Major Kleopas, Captain Woll and Lieutenant Pauk stood on the sooty apron
of the machine sheds as the unit’s Trojans towed in the Drum Roll and the Fancy Klara. Both tanks could be
repaired, Gaunt had been told. The Drum Roll’s damaged starboard track section was a buckled, dragging mess, and
the crew, led by Captain Hancot, rode on the turret of their wounded steed. Though immobilised early in the fight,
they had continued to fire and make kills effectively.
But for an oddly neat hole punched into the plating of its turret, the Klara seemed intact. Only her driver had
survived. Shutting off the electrics, tech-priests and sappers had disarmed the unexploded enemy shell that had, both
directly and indirectly, killed LeTaw and his gun crew. Once it had been extracted safely from the ruptured magazine,
and the magazine picked over for damaged munitions, the Klara was towed into Bhavnager for turret repairs. A
replacement crew was assembled from survivors of slain tanks.
Gaunt crossed to the watching tank officers and properly congratulated the Pardus commander for his part in the
victory. Kleopas looked tired and pale, but he gladly shook Gaunt’s hand.
“One for the casebooks in the Armour Academy on Pardua,” Gaunt said. “I imagine so.”
“I have a… a question, I suppose, colonel-commissar,” said Kleopas.
“Voice it, sir,” said Gaunt.
“You and I… all of us were briefed that while Infardi forces were still at large in the hinterlands, their numbers
were minimal. The opposition they raised here at Bhavnager was huge in scale, well organised and well supplied.
Not the sort of show you’d expect from a broken, running enemy.”
“I agree completely.”
“Damn it, Gaunt, we moved in on this target expecting a hard fight, but not an all-out battle. My machines faced
numerical odds greater than they’ve ever known. Don’t get me wrong, there was great glory here and I live to serve,
the Emperor protects.”
“The Emperor protects,” echoed Gaunt Woll and Pauk.
“But this isn’t what they told us was out here. Can you… comment at least?”
Gaunt looked at his boots thoughtfully for a moment. “When I was with Slaydo, just before the start of the crusade,
we fell upon Khulen in winter time. I served with the Hyrkans then. Brave soldiers all. The enemy had vast numbers
dug into the three main cities. It was snow-season and hellish cold. Two months it took, and we drove them out.
Victory was ours. Slaydo told us to maintain vigil, and none of the command echelon knew why. Slaydo was a wily
old goat of course. He’d seen enough in his long career to have insight. His instincts proved correct. Within a month,
three times as many enemy units fell upon our positions. Three times as many as we had driven out in the first place.
They’d given up, you see? They’d abandoned the cities and fallen back before we’d had time to rob them of their full
strength, regrouped in the wilderness, and come back in vast numbers.”
“What happened?” asked Pauk, fascinated.
“Slaydo happened, lieutenant,” smiled Gaunt and they all laughed.
“We took Khulen. A liberation effort turned into an all-out war. It lasted six months. We destroyed them. Now,
consider this, a year later at the start of this crusade, liberating Ashek II. Formidable enemy strengths in the hives and
the trade-towns of the archipelago. Three months’ hard fighting and we were masters of the world, but the Imperial
tacticians warned that the lava hills might provide excellent natural defences in which the enemy could regroup. We
battened down, ready for the counter sweep. It never came. After a lot of recon we discovered that the enemy hadn’t
fallen back at all. They’d fought to the last man in the hives and we’d vanquished them entirely on the first phase.
They hadn’t even thought to use the landscape that so favoured them.”
“I’m beginning to feel like a child in tactica class,” smiled Woll.
“I’m sorry,” said Gaunt. “I was simply illustrating a number of points.”
“That any enemy twisted by Chaos is always unpredictable?” suggested Kleopas. “That, for one thing.”
“That because the enemy is so unpredictable, we might as well hang all the Imperial tacticians now?” chuckled
Woll.
“Exactly, Woll, for two.”
“That this is what’s occurring here?” asked Kleopas.
Gaunt nodded. “You all know I have no love of Lugo. I have personal reason to object to the man.”
“Make no apologies for him,” Kleopas said. “He’s a new minted upstart with no experience.”
“Well, you said it, not me,” grinned Gaunt. “The point is… whatever our lord general’s failings… the spawn of
Chaos is never predictable, never logical. You can’t out-think them. To try would be madness. You can only prepare
for any event. My clumsy examples were meant to illustrate that. If I failed at all at the Doctrinopolis, it was that I
didn’t cover every possibility.”
“I was with you. Gaunt. You were given orders that prevented you from using your experience.”
“Gracious. Thank you. That’s what I feel we have here A misguided expectation on the part of Lugo that the enemy
will behave like an Imperial army. He thinks it will hold the cities until it is beaten. It will not. He thinks that only
defeated remnants will flee after the battle. Not true again. I believe that the Infardi gave up the cities when they
realised we had the upper hand, and purposefully backed up their main strengths into the outlying territories. Hence
the weight of numbers at Bhavnager.”
“Lugo be damned,” said Woll.
“Lugo ought to listen to his officers, that’s all,” said Gaunt. “That’s what made Slaydo Slaydo… or Solon Solon…
the ability to listen. I fear that’s lacking from the crusade’s senior ranks now, even lacking in Macaroth.”
The Pardus officers shuffled uneasily.
“I’ll blaspheme no more, gentlemen,” Gaunt said and drew smiles from them all. “My advice is simply this.
Prepare. Expert the unexpected. The arch-enemy is not a logical or predictable foe, but he has his own agenda. We
can’t imagine it, but we can suffer all too well when it takes effect.”
He stepped back as Rawne, Kolea, Varl, Hark and Surgeon Curth approached across the rockcrete apron to join
them, and an impromptu operations meeting came to order. Curth handed a personnel review to the colonelcommissar.
They had two hundred and twenty-four wounded, of whom seventy-three were serious. Curth told Gaunt frankly
that although they could move all the wounded with them, at least eighteen would not survive the transit more than a
day. Nine would not survive the transit period.
“Your recommendations, surgeon?”
“Simple, sir. None of them travel.”
Rawne shook his head with a dry laugh. “What do we do? Leave them here?”
Kolea suggested they establish a stronghold at Bhavnager, where the injured might be tended in a field hospital.
Though it meant leaving a reduced force at the town, vulnerable to the roaming Infardi, it might be the only hope of
survival for the casualties. Besides, the honour guard would need Bhavnager’s fuel resources for the return trip.
Gaunt conceded the merit of this idea. He would leave one hundred Ghosts and a supporting armoured force at
Bhavnager to guard the fuel dump and the wounded while he pushed on into the Sacred Hills. Curth immediately
insisted on staying, and Gaunt allowed that, selecting Lesp as the ongoing mission’s chief medic. Captain Woll
volunteered to command the armour guard of the Bhavnager fastness. Gaunt and Kleopas arranged to leave the Death
Jester, Xenophobe and the mid-repairs Drum Roll and Fancy Klara under his command. Gaunt chose Kolea to
command the position, with Sergeant Varl as his second.
Kolea accepted the task obediently, and went off to gather up the platoons under his immediate command. Varl
was rather more against the choice, and as the meeting broke up, took Gaunt quietly to one side and begged to be
allowed to join him on this final mission.
“It’s not my final mission, sergeant,” Gaunt said.
“But sir—”
“Have you ever disobeyed an order, Varl?”
“No, sir.”
“Don’t do it now. This is important. I trust you. Do this for me.”
“Yes sir.”
“For Tanith, like I know you remember her, Varl.”
“Yes, sir.”
“For Tanith.”
Then Gaunt roused up the main force and pushed on into the rainwoods, leaving the lowlands and Bhavnager
behind in their dust.
Knots of Ghost and Pardus personnel watched the convoy depart. Varl stood watching for a long time after the last
vehicle had vanished from sight and only dust clouds showed their progress.
“Sergeant?”
He swung around out of his reverie. Kolea and Woll had grouped squad leaders and tank chiefs around a chart
table on the steps of the battered town hall.
“If you’d care to join us?” Kolea smiled. “Let’s figure out how best to get this place defended.”
From Bhavnager, the wide road made a sharp incline for five or six kilometres as it ran north. Gaunt noticed that
already the land to either side of the road was becoming less open. Field systems and cultivated areas began to
disappear, except for a few well-watered paddocks and meadows, where lush stands of woodland began to flourish.
Cycads and a larger variant of acestus predominated, often lush with sphagnum moss or skeins of a dark epiphyte
known locally as priest’s beard. Luminously coloured flowers dotted the thickets, some unusually large.
The air became increasingly humid. The woods to either side grew thicker and taller. Within the first hour after
departure, sunlight began to flicker down on the travelling convoy, slanting through the ladder of the trees.
After three hours, the track levelled out and became damp sand and mud rather than dust. The air was heated and
still, and clothing began to stick and cling with the airborne moisture. Every now and then, without warning or
overture, heavy, warm rain began to fall, straight down, sometimes so hard visibility dropped to a few metres and
headlamps went on. Then, just as abruptly, the rain would stop, as if it had never been there. Ground mist would well
up almost immediately. Thunder rambled in the heat-swollen air.
Past noon, they stopped, circulating rations and rotating driving teams. The rainwoods to either side of the trail
were mysterious realms of green shadow, and a sweetly pungent vegetable smell permeated everything. Between the
showers, the place was alive with wildlife: whirring beetles with wings like rabies, rivers of colonial mites,
arachnids and grotesquely large shelled gastropods that left trails of glistening glue on the barks of the trees. There
were many birds too: not the riverine forkbills, but shoals of tiny, coloured fliers that buzzed as they hovered and
darted. Their tiny forms were small enough to be clenched in a man’s fist, except their long, thin down-curved beaks
which were almost thirty centimetres long.
Standing by his Salamander as he drank water and ate a ration bar, Gaunt saw eight-limbed lizards, their scaled
flesh as golden as the stupa of Bhavnager’s temple, flickering through the undergrowth. The whoops, whistles and
cries of larger, unseen animals echoed intermittently from the woods.
“It surprises me you left Kolea at the town,” Hark said, appearing beside Gaunt. Hark had slipped off his heavy
coat and jacket and stood, in shirt sleeves and a silver-frogged waistcoat, mopping sweat from his brow with a
white kerchief. Gaunt hadn’t heard him approach, and Harks conversations tended to start like that, in the middle,
without any hail or hello.
“Why is that, commissar?”
“He’s one of the regiment’s best officers. Ferociously loyal and obedient.”
“I know.” Gaunt took a swig of water. “Who better to leave in charge of an independent operation?”
“I’d have kept him close by. Rawne is the one I’d leave behind.”
“Really?”
“He’s a good enough soldier, but he fights from the head, not the heart. And there’s no missing the fact he has
issues with you.”
“Major Rawne and I have an understanding. He — and many other Ghosts — blame me for the death of their
world. Time was, I think, Rawne would have killed me to avenge Tanith. But he’s grown into command. Now, I
think, he accepts that we just simply don’t like each other and gets on with it.”
“I’ve studied his files and, over the last few days, I’ve studied the man. He’s a cynic and a malcontent. I don’t
think his issues with you have subsided at all. His knife still itches for your back. The time will come. He’s just
become very good at waiting.”
“There was a saying Slaydo used to like: ‘Keep your friends close…’ ”
“ ‘…and your enemies closer.’ I am familiar with that notion, Gaunt. Sometimes it does not work well at all.”
The cry went down the convoy to remount. “Why don’t you travel the next part in my carrier?”
Gaunt asked Hark. He hoped none of the remark’s irony would be lost.
Forty minutes north of the main convoy, the Recon Spearhead was slowing to a crawl. Rawne had chosen to
accompany Mkoll’s forward unit. For this, the third day, the spear comprised two scout Salamanders, a Hydra flak
tractor, the Destroyer Grey Venger and the Conqueror Say Your Prayers.
The track was narrowing right down, so tight that the tree cover was beginning to meet overhead and the hulls of
the big tanks brushed the foliage.
Mkoll kept checking the chart-slates to make sure they weren’t off course.
“There was no other track or road,” said Rawne.
“I know, and the locator co-ordinates are right. I just didn’t expert things to close down so tightly so fast. I keep
feeling like we must have missed the main way and come off onto a herding trail.”
They both had to duck as a sheath of low-hanging rubbery green leaves brushed over the crewbay.
“Looks like fast-growing stuff,” said Rawne. “You know what tropical flora can be like. This stuff may have come
up in the last month’s wet season.”
Mkoll looked over the side of the Salamander at the condition of the track itself. The rainwoods were packed into
the spur gorges of the foothills, and that meant there was a slight gradient against them. The centre of the trackway
was eroded into a channel down which a stream ran, and heavier flood-aways had brought down mud, rock and plant
materials. The Salamanders were managing fine, and so was the Hydra, but the two big tanks were beginning to slip
occasionally. Worse still, the track was beginning to disintegrate under their weight. Mkoll thought darkly about the
weight of machines behind them, particularly the fifty-plus long-body troop trucks, which had nothing like the power
or traction of the tracked vehicles.
Scintillating beetles sawed through the air between scout leader and major. Rawne kept one eye on the auspex.
Both he and Mkoll knew considerable elements of Infardi had fled north into these woodlands after the battle, but no
trace whatever had been found of them on the track. Somehow they’d got troops and fighting vehicles out of sight.
A cry came up from ahead and the spearhead stopped. Standing the scout troops and the armour to ready watch,
Rawne and Mkoll went forward on foot. The lead Salamander had rounded a slow bend in the trail to find a massive
cycad slumped across the track. The mass of rotting wood weighed many tonnes.
“Can you ram it aside?” Rawne asked the Salamander driver.
“Not enough purchase on this incline,” the driver replied. “We’ll need chains to pull it out.”
“Couldn’t we cut it up or blast it?” asked Trooper Caober.
Mkoll had moved round to the uplifted rootball of the fallen trunk, which was sticky with peat-black soil and
wormy loam. There were streaks of a dry, reddish oxide deposit on some of the root fingers. He sniffed it.
“Maybe we could get the Conqueror past. Lay in with its dozer blade,” Brostin was saying.
“Down! Down!” Mkoll yelled.
He’d barely uttered the words when las-fire stung out of the undergrowth alongside them. Rounds spanged off the
vehicle hulls or tore overhanging leaves. The driver of the lead Salamander was hit in the neck and fell back into his
machine’s crewbay with a shriek.
Mkoll dived into cover behind the cycad trunk next to Rawne.
“How did you know?” Rawne asked.
“Fyceline traces on the tree roots. They used a charge to bring it over and block us.”
“Sitting fething target…” Rawne cursed.
The Ghosts were firing back now, but they could see nothing to aim at. Even Lillo, who happened to be in the
crewbay of the lead Salamander and therefore had an auspex to refer to, could find no target. The auspex gave back
nothing except a flat reading off the hot dense mass of foliage.
“Cannons!” Rawne ordered, over his vox.
The coaxial and pintle mounts of the machines stuttered into life, raking the leaf canopy to shreds with heavy
washes of fire. A moment later, Sergeant Horkan’s Hydra drowned them all out as it commenced firing. The four,
long barrelled autocannons of its anti-aircraft mount swivelled around and blasted simultaneous streams of
illuminator rounds into the woodlands at head height, cropping trees, shredding bushes, pulverising ferns, liquidising
foliage. A stinking mist of vaporised plant matter and aspirated sap filled the trackway, making the troops choke and
retch.
After thirty seconds’ auto-fire, the Hydra ceased. Apart from the drizzle of canopy moisture, the collapse of
destroyed plants and the clicking of the Hydra’s autoloader as it cycled, there was silence. The Hydra was designed
to bring down combat aircraft at long range. Point-blank, against a soft target of vegetation, it had cut a clearing in
the rainwood fifty metres deep and thirty across. A few denuded, broken trunks stood up amid the leaf-pulp.
Mkoll and Caober moved forward to check the area. The partially disintegrated remains of two Infardi lay amid
the green destruction.
There was no sign of further attack.
Just a little ambush; just a little harrying, delaying tactic.
“Get chains round that tree!” Rawne ordered. At this rate, if the damn Infardi dropped a tree every few kilometres,
it was going to take weeks to cross these rainwoods.
About a hundred and twenty kilometres south of the rainwoods, a lone Chimera coughed its way down the dusty
highway through an empty, abandoned village called Mukret. Since the dawn-stop that morning, it had borne the
name “the Wounded Wagon” on its flank, daubed in orange anti-rust lacquer by a hasty, imprecise hand.
The day was glaring hot, and Greer kept a close eye on the temp-gauges. The old heap’s panting turbine was redlining
regularly, and twice now they’d had to stop, dump the boiling water-mix in the coolant system and replace it
with water drawn from the river in jerry cans. Now they were out of coolant chemicals, and the mix in the flushed
out system was so dilute it was essentially running on river water alone.
Greer pulled the vehicle to the roadside under the shade of a row of tree-ferns before the needles went past the
point of no return.
“Fifteen minute break,” he called back into the cargo space. He needed to stretch his legs anyway, and maybe
there would be time to show Daur a little more of the skills needed to drive the machine. An ability to swap drivers
meant they would be able to keep going longer without rest stops.
Corbec’s team dismounted into the sunlight and the dry air, seeking shelter at once under the ferns. The cabin fans
and recirculators in the Chimera weren’t working either, so it was like going on a long journey in an oven.
Corbec, Daur and Milo consulted the chart. “We should get to Nusera Crossing by dark. That would be good. If
they’re in the rainwoods now, it means their rate of speed will have dropped, so we might just start catching them,”
said Corbec. He turned aside, unpopped his water flask and knocked down a pill or two.
“The far side of the river bothers me,” Daur was saying. “Seems likely that’s where the mass of Infardi are
concentrated. Things could get hotter for us too once we make the crossing.”
“Noted,” said Corbec. “What are these here?”
Milo peered. The colonel was indicating a network of faint lines that followed the river north when it forked that
way at Nusera. They radiated up into the Sacred Hills, echoing, though not precisely, the branches of the holy river’s
head waters. “I don’t know. It says ‘sooka’ on the key. I’ll ask Sanian.”
Nearby, at the river’s edge, Vamberfeld stood in the shallows skipping stones out over the flat water between the
reed beds. A slight breeze stirred the feathery rushes on the far bank, which were starkly ash-white against the baked,
blue sky.
He made one skip four times. Concentrating on simple actions like that helped him to control the shaking in his
hand. The water was soothingly cool against his legs.
He skipped another. Just before it made its fifth bounce, a much larger stone flew out over his head and fell with a
dull splash into the river. Vamberfeld looked round.
On the bank, Bragg grinned at him sheepishly.
“Never could do that.”
“So I see,” said Vamberfeld.
Bragg gingerly stepped out into the shallows, steering his clumsy bulk unsteadily over the loose stones of the bed.
“Maybe you could teach me?”
Vamberfeld thought for a moment. He took another couple of flat stones from his pants pocket and handed one to
the big Tanith.
“Hold it like this.”
“Like this?” Bragg’s meaty fingers dwarfed Vamberfeld’s.
“No, like this. Flat to the water. Now, it’s in the wrist. Make it spin as you release. Just so.”
Three neat splashes. Paff-paff-paff.
“Nice,” said Bragg, and tried. The stone hit the water and disappeared.
Vamberfeld fetched out two more stones. “Try again, Bragg,” he said, and when the big man laughed he realised he
had unwittingly made a joke.
Vamberfeld skipped a few more, and slowly, Bragg managed it too. One throw where Vamberfeld made four or
five. The Verghastite suddenly, joyfully, realised that he was relaxed for the first time in recent memory. Just to be
here, calm, in the sunlight, casually teaching a likeably gentle man to do something pointless like skip stones. It
reminded him of his childhood, taking vacations up on the River Hass with his brothers. For a moment, the shaking
almost stopped. Bragg’s attention was fixed entirely on Vamberfeld’s hands and demonstrations.
From the corner of his eye Vamberfeld saw the white rushes on the far side of the river sway in the breeze again.
Except there was no breeze.
He didn’t want to look.
“Hold it a little tighter, like that.”
“I think I’m getting it. Feth me! Two bounces!”
“You are getting it. Try another.”
Don’t look. Don’t look and it won’t be there. Don’t look. Don’t look. Don’t look. “Yes! Three! Ha ha!”
Ignore the green shapes in amongst the rushes. Ignore them and they won’t be there. And this moment won’t
end. And the terror won’t come back. Ignore them. Don’t look.
“Good shot! Five there! Can you do six?”
Don’t look. Don’t say anything. Ignore that urge to shout out: you know it will just start you shaking again.
Bragg hasn’t noticed. No one has to know. It’ll go away. It’ll go away because it isn’t even there.
“Try again, Bragg.”
“Sure. Hey, Vambs… Why’s your hand shaking?”
“What?”
It isn’t. Don’t look.
“Your hand’s really starring to shake, pal. You okay? You look kinda sick. Vambs?”
“It’s nothing. It’s not shaking. Not. Try again. Try again.”
“Vambs?”
No. No. No no no no.
Shockingly loud, a lasrifle fired right behind them, the echo of the snap-roar rolling across the wide river. Bragg
reeled round and saw Nessa crouched in a braced position on the bank, her long-las resting across a twist of roots.
She fired again, out across the water.
“What the feth?” Bragg cried. His vox-link came alive.
“Who’s shooting? Who’s shooting?”
Bragg looked round. He saw the green shapes in the rushes over the river. There were silent flashes of light and
suddenly las rounds were skipping like well-thrown stones in the water around him.
“Feth!” he cried again. Nessa fired a third, then a fourth shot. Derin appeared, scrambling down the bank behind
her, lasgun in hand.
“Infardi! Infardi on the far shore!” Derin was yelling into his link.
Las-fire was punching up and churning the water right across the shallows. Bragg turned to Vamberfeld and saw to
his horror the man was frozen, his eyes rolled back, his entire body spasming and vibrating. Blood and froth coated
his chin. He’d bitten through his tongue.
“Vambs! Ah, feth it!”
Bragg grabbed the convulsing Verghastite and threw him over his shoulder. His wound screamed out in protest but
he didn’t care. He started struggling his way towards the shore. Derin was now firing on auto with his assault las in
support of Nessa’s hot-shots. Enemy rounds cut through the trunk and branches of the old trees above them with a
peculiar, brittle sound.
Corbec, Daur and Milo appeared at the top of the bank, weapons raised. Dorden came bouncing and scrambling
down the shady bank on his arse, and splashed out into the water, reaching for the lumbering Bragg.
“Pass him here! Pass him here, Bragg! Is he hit?”
“I don’t think so, doc!”
A las-shot grazed Bragg’s left buttock and he yowled. Another missed Dorden’s head by a hand’s breadth and a
third hit the doctor’s medikit and blew it open.
Dorden and Bragg manhandled Vamberfeld ashore and then dragged him up the bank into the cover of the
roadwall. The five Ghosts behind them unleashed a steady salvo of fire at the far bank. Glancing back, Bragg saw at
least one raft of green silk floating in the water.
Greer ran up from the Chimera, clutching Bragg’s auto-cannon. Sanian followed him, a stricken look of fear on her
face.
“What the hell’s going on?” Greer asked, gazing in sick horror at the weirdly vibrating Vamberfeld. Vamberfeld’s
shaking hands were twisted into claw-shapes by the extreme muscular spasm. He’d wet himself too.
“Ah, feth. The nutter’s lost it,” Greer said.
“Shut the feth up and help me!” Dorden snarled. “Hold his head! Hold his head, Greer! Now! Make sure he
doesn’t smash it into anything!”
Bragg snatched the autocannon from Greer and ran back to the bank, locking in a drum-mag. The enemy fire was
still heavy. Ten or twelve shooters, Bragg estimated. As he settled down to fire, he saw another Infardi tumble into
the river, hit by Nessa. Clouds of downy white fibre were rising like wheat chaff from the rushes where the Imperial
firepower was mashing it.
Bragg opened fire. His initial burst chopped into the river in a row of tall splashes. He adjusted his aim and began
to reap through the rush stands, chopping them down, exposing and killing three or four green-clad figures.
“Cease fire! Cease fire!” Corbec yelled.
The gunfire from the opposite bank had stopped.
“Everyone okay?”
A muted chorus of answers.
“Back to the vehicle,” Corbec shouted. “We have to get moving.”
They drove west out of Mukret for three kilometres and then pulled off the road, tucking the Chimera into the cover
of a stand of acestus trees. Everyone was still breathing hard, faces shiny with sweat.
“Good pick up, girl,” Corbec said to Nessa. She nodded and smiled.
“Didn’t you see them, Bragg?”
“I was talking to Vambs, chief. He started to go off weird on me and next thing they were shooting.”
“Doc?”
Dorden turned round from the supine Vamberfeld who was laid on a bed roll on the floor of the cargo bay. “He’s
stopped fitting. He’ll recover soon.”
“What was it, the trauma again?”
“I think so. An extreme physiological reaction. This poor man is very sick, sick in a way that’s hard for us to
understand.”
“He’s a nut job,” said Greer.
Corbec turned his considerable bulk to face Greer. “Any more talk like that and I’ll break your face. He’s one of
us. He needs our help. We’re going to give it to him. And we’re not going to make him feel bad when he comes round
either. Last thing he needs to feel is that we’re somehow against him.”
“Spoken like a true medicae, Colm,” said Dorden. “Right. Support. Can we all do that? Greer? Good.”
“What now?” asked Daur.
“We keep on for the crossing. Problem is they likely know we’re around now. We gotta play careful.”
It took the rest of the afternoon to reach Nusera. They moved slowly and made frequent stops. Milo kept his ear to
the old vox-caster, listening for the sound of enemy transmissions. There was nothing but white noise. He dearly
wished they had an auspex.
They stopped about a kilometre short of the crossing, and Corbec, Milo and Nessa moved ahead on foot to scout.
Sanian insisted on accompanying them. They crossed several irrigated fields, and a pasture gone to weed where the
skeletal remains of two chelons lay, their vast shells calcifying in the sun. They passed through one wooded stretch
where boxes of ornately carved wood were raised on stout decorated posts. Corbec had seen many like them along
the Tembarong Road.
“What are they?” he asked Sanian.
“Post tombs,” she replied. “The last resting places of pilgrim-priests who die along the holy way. They are sacred
things.”
The quartet edged through the glade, skirting the shadows of the silent post tombs. Sanian made a gesture of
respect to each one.
Pilgrims who died along the way, Corbec thought. Miserably, he could identify with that all too well.
Passing through another dense stand of woods, Corbec thought he could smell the river. But his nose had been
impaired by way too many years smoking cheap cheroots. Nessa had it spot on.
Promethium, she signed.
She was right. It was the stink of fuel. Another few hundred metres, and they began to hear the rumble of engines.
They crossed the mouth of an overgrown trail that joined the road from the north, and then bellied down in the
final approach through the undergrowth to the crossing.
On the far side of the river, a column of lime green painted armour and transport elements was feeding onto the
Tembarong Road from the arable land to the south. Corbec counted at least fifty vehicles, and those were only the
ones in view. Infardi troopers milled about the slow moving procession, and over the growl of engines he could hear
the chanting and the praise-singing. A refrain kept repeating, a refrain that featured the name Pater Sin over and over.
“Pater fething Sin,” Corbec murmured.
Milo watched the spectacle with a chill in his blood. After the Doctrinopolis, despite the catastrophe at the
Citadel, the Infardi here were supposed to be broken, just fleeing remnants in the hinterlands. Here was a damn army,
moving north with a purpose. And from the signs of battle the night before, Gaunt’s force had encountered at least as
many up in Bhavnager.
It seemed to Milo that the Infardi may have actually allowed the cities of Hagia to fall so that they might regroup
ready for the approaching fleet-scale reinforcements. It was a wild idea, but one that smacked of truth. No one could
ever predict the illogical tactics of Chaos. Faced with an imposing Imperial liberation force, had they simply given
up the cities, left foul booby-traps like the Citadel behind them, and gone to ground ready for the next phase?
A phase they knew they would certainly win.
“No going through that way,” Corbec whispered, turning back to look at his companions. He sighed and looked
down, apparently defeated.
“Feth… We might as well give up.”
“What if we follow the river north instead of the road?” Milo asked. “There’s no track, boy.”
“Yes, yes there is, chief. The… the whatcha call ’em. The sooka. Sanian, what are they?”
“We passed one just a while back. They are the herdsman trails, older even than the road of pilgrimage. The routes
used by the drovers to take the chelon herds up into the high pastures, and bring them down again for market each
year.”
“So they run up into the Sacred Hills?”
“Yes, but they are very old. Not made for machines.”
“We’ll see,” said Corbec, his eyes bright again. He punched Milo on the arm playfully. “Good head you got there,
Brin. Smart thinking. We’ll see.”
So it was that the Wounded Wagon began to thread its way up north along the sooka after dark that night, running east
of the holy river. The track was very narrow for the most part, and its course worn into a deep trough by millennia of
plodding feet. The Chimera slithered and bounced, jarring violently. Once in a while, members of the team had to
dismount and clear overgrowth by the light of the hull searchlight.
They were now over a hundred and fifty kilometres behind the honour guard advance, travelling slower, and
diverging steadily away to the north.
Vamberfeld slept. He dreamed of the herd-girl, her calf chelons and her piercing eyes.
TWELVE
THE HOLY DEPTHS
“One aching vista, everlasting.”
—Saint Sabbat, Biographica Hagia
Ghosts. Ice-clad ghosts. Giants looming, impossibly tall, out of the dry, distant haze.
It had taken two full days for the honour guard column to crawl and squirm its way up through the dense, dark,
smelly rainwoods. There had been sixteen random, inconsequential ambushes along the way. Gaunt’s forces had
skirmished with unseen harriers who left only a few dead behind. The progress lost Gaunt eighteen more men, one
scout Salamander and a Chimera. But now, at dawn on the sixth day out from the Doctrinopolis, the honour guard
began the laborious climb out of the rainwoods’ humid mist and into the feet of the Sacred Hills. Above and around
them, the mountain range rose up like silent monsters. They were already passing three thousand metres above sealevel.
Some of the surrounding mountains topped out at over ten thousand metres.
The air was cool and dry, and the highland path ran through flat raised valleys where the soil was desiccated and
golden. Few plants grew, except a wind-twitching gorse, rock-crusting lichens and a ribbony kelp-like weed.
It was temperate, cool and clear. Visibility was up to fifty kilometres. The sky was blue, and the ridges of
mountains stood clear of the lower rainwood fogs like jagged white teeth.
Six thousand years before, a child called Sabbat, daughter of a high pasture herdsman, had lived up in these
inhospitable and awesomely beautiful highlands. The spirit of the Emperor had filled her, and caused her to abandon
her herds and track her way down through the filthy swamps of the rainwoods on the start of a course that would lead
her, in fire and steel and ceramite, to distant stars and fabulous victories.
One hundred and five years later, she had made the return journey, borne on a palanquin by eight Space Marines of
the Adeptus Astartes White Scars chapter.
A saint, even from the moment of her martyrdom. An Imperial saint carried in full honour to her birthplace by the
Emperor’s finest warriors.
The local star group that now twinkled above her mountains in early evening was named after her. The planet was
made sacred in her memory.
Saint Sabbat. The shepherd girl who came down from the mountains of Hagia to shepherd the Imperium into one of
its most punishing and fast-moving crusades. One hundred inhabited systems along the edge of the Segmentum
Pacificus. The Sabbat Worlds. A pan-planet civilisation.
Gaunt stood up in the crewbay of his lurching Salamander, gazing at the wide, high, clear scenery, the refreshing
wind in his face. The sweat of two days in the rainwoods needed blowing away.
Gaunt remembered Slaydo reciting her history to him, back in the early days, as their crusade was being formed. It
was shortly after Khulen. Everyone was talking excitedly about the new crusade. The High Lords of Terra were
going to select Slaydo as Warmaster because of Khulen. The great honour would fall to him.
Gaunt remembered being called to the study office of the great lord militant commander. He had been just a
commissar back then.
The study office, aboard the Citadel ship Borealis, was a circular wooden library of nine levels, lined with fiftytwo
million catalogued works. Gaunt was one of two thousand and forty officers attending the initial meeting.
Slaydo, a hunched but powerful man in his late one-forties, limped up to the lectern at the heart of the study office
in his flame yellow plate armour.
“My sons,” he began, not needing a vox-boost in the perfect acoustics of the study office. “It seems the High Lords
of Terra approve of the work we’ve done together.”
A monumental cheer exploded out across the chamber.
Slaydo waited for it to die down.
“We have been given our crusade, my sons… the Sabbat Worlds!”
The answering shout deafened Gaunt He remembered yelling until he was hoarse. No sound he’d ever experienced
since, not the massed forces of Chaos, not the thunder of titans, matched the power of that cheer.
“My sons, my sons.” Slaydo held his augmetic hand up for peace. “Let me tell you about the Sabbat Worlds. And
first, let me tell you about the saint herself…”
Slaydo had spoken with passionate conviction about Saint Sabbat the beati as he called her. It had seemed to
Gaunt even then that Slaydo held her in a special regard. He was a dutiful man, who honoured all the Imperial
worthies, but Sabbat was somehow dearest to him.
“The beati was a warrior,” Slaydo had explained to Gaunt months later, on the eve of the liberation of Formal
Prime. “She exemplifies the Imperial creed and the human spirit better than any figure in the annals. As a boy, she
inspired me. I take this crusade as a personal matter, a duty greater than any I have yet undertaken for the Golden
Throne. To repay her inspiration, to walk in her path and make free again the worlds she brought from darkness. I fed
as if I am… a pilgrim, Ibram.”
The words had never left him.
The wide, bare plateau allowed them to make back time, but it lent them a sense of vulnerability too. In the lowlands,
on the roads and tracks, the heavy column of armoured machines and carriers had seemed imposing and huge,
dominating the environment. But out here, in the majestic uplands, they seemed lonely and small, exposed in the treeless
plains, dwarfed by the location.
Already, Lesp had reported the first few cases of altitude sickness. There was no question of stopping or slowing
to assist acclimatisation. Surgeon Curth, ever the pragmatic thinker, had included decent quantities of acetazolamide
in the drags carried on the medical supply track. This mild diuretic stimulated oxygen intake, and Lesp began
prescribing it for the men worst affected by the thinner air.
Landmarks on the plateau itself were few, and their appearance became almost hypnotically fascinating to the
troops. They stared as shapes spied distantly slowly resolved as they came closer. Usually they were nothing more
than large boulders, erratics left by long departed glaciers. Sometimes they were single post tombs. Many of the
Ghosts watched for hours as these lonely objects slowly receded from view in the distance behind them.
By mid-afternoon on the fifth day of travel, the temperature again dropped sharply The air was still clear blue and
the sun was bright, so bright in fact that several Ghosts had burned without realising it. But there was a biting wind
now, moaning over the flatness, and the great shapes of the mountains no longer glowed translucent white in the
brilliance They had become a shade or two darker and duller, greying and misting.
“Snow,” announced ayatani Zweil, travelling with Gaunt. He stood up in the back of the Salamander, swaying at
the motion, and sniffed the air. “Snow definitely.”
“The air looks clear,” said Gaunt.
“But the mountains don’t. Their faces are dark. Snow will be with us before the day’s done.”
It was certainly colder. Gaunt had put on his storm coat and his gloves.
“How bad? Can you tell?”
“It may flurry for a few hours. It may white out and murder us all. The mountains are capricious, colonelcommissar.”
“She calls them the Holy Depths,” Gaunt said idly, meaning the saint.
“She certainly does. Several times in her gospel, in fact. She came from up here and went down into the world.
It’s typical of her to think about them from the point of looking down. In her mind, the Sacred Hills rise up over
everything. Even space and other planets.”
“I always thought it was a metaphor too. The great elevation from which the Emperor looks down on us all, his
lowly servants toiling in the depths.”
Zweil grinned and toyed with his beard. “What a profoundly bleak and inhospitable cosmos you inhabit, colonelcommissar.
No wonder you fight so much.”
“So — it’s not a metaphor.”
“Oh, I’m sure it is! I’m sure that stark image is precisely its meaning. Remember, Saint Sabbat was an awful lot
more like you than like me.”
“I take that as a compliment.”
Zweil gestured at the ring of peaks. “Actually, being at the top of a great mountain means only one thing.”
“Which is?”
“It means there’s a long way to fall.”
As the light began to fail, they made camp at the mouth of the next ascending pass. Mkoll estimated that the
Shrinehold was still two days away. They raised tents and a strong perimeter. Heater units were put to work and
chemical fires lit. No one had thought to bring kindling from the foothills and there was no wood to gather up here.
The snow began just before dark, billowing silently from the north. A few minutes before it began, a trooper on
watch saw what he thought were contacts on the wide-band auspex. By the time he’d called up Gaunt and Kleopas,
the snow had closed in and the sensor was blind.
But for the short time it lasted, it had looked like contacts. A mass of vehicles, moving north across the plateau
behind them, twenty kilometres away.
“Back! Back now!” cried Milo, trying his best not to get caught in the sheets of liquid mud the Chimera’s tracks were
kicking up. Wheezing and puffing, the transport’s turbines gunned again, and it slithered from side to side in the steep
rut.“
Shut it down! Shut it down before it overheats!” shouted Dorden, exasperated. The engine whined and cut out.
Quiet returned to the sooka trackway. Birds warbled in the gorse thickets and the gnarled vipiriums.
Greer jumped down from the back hatch and came around the side of the Wounded Wagon to survey the problem.
A fast-moving stream, running directly alongside this stretch of sooka, had undercut the trail and the weight of the
Chimera had collapsed it leaving the machine raked over at a drunken angle.
They’d been on the sooka for over two days now, since Corbec’s decision to avoid the Infardi at Nusera, and this
was by no means the first time the transport had fallen foul of the track. But it was the first time they hadn’t been able
to right it again first rime.
The chelon trails led up into the holy river headwaters and were for the most part steep. The narrow and
sometimes winding trail had taken them up into wooded country where there was no other sign of human life. Using
Sanian’s knowledge, they had taken a route that avoided the worst of the lower spurs and gorges where the thick and
unwholesome rainwoods flourished. Instead, they kept to more open ground where the shelving land was clad in
breaks of trees, or small deciduous woods through which the trails rambled. The water was never far away: hectic
rills and streams that sometimes shot out over lips in the crags and poured in little silver falls; or the mass of the
main water itself, crashing down the sloping land and turning sudden drops into seething cataracts.
Each time they moved clear of tree cover, it was possible to look back and see the vast green and yellow plain of
the river basin below them.
“Maybe we could find a tree trunk and lever it,” suggested Bragg.
Greer looked at the big Tanith, then at the Chimera, and then back at the Tanith. “Not even you,” he said.
“Does that work?” Corbec asked, pointing to the power-assisted cable drum mounted under the Chimera’s nose.
“Of course not,” said Greer.
“Let’s try and pack stuff under the tread there,” Corbec said, “then Greer can try it again.”
They gathered rocks and logs from the trail and pieces of slate from the stream bed and Derin and Daur wedged
them in under the track assembly.
The team stood clear and Greer revved the engines again. The tracks bit. There was a loud crack as a log
fractured, and then the machine lurched forward and onto the trail. There was a half-hearted cheer.
“Mount up!” Corbec called.
“Where’s Vamberfeld?” Dorden asked. The Verghastite had said little since the episode at Mukret and had kept to
himself.
“He was here a second ago,” said Daur.
“I’ll go look for him,” Milo volunteered.
“No, Brinny,” said Bragg. “Let me.”
As the rest made ready, Bragg pushed off the side of the trail and lumbered into the glades. Birds called and piped
in the leafy canopy at the tops of the tall, bare trunks. The place was full of sunlight and striated shadows.
“Vambs? Where’d you go, Vambs?” Bragg had taken a proprietorial interest in Vamberfeld’s welfare since the
stone skipping. The colonel had asked him to keep an eye on Vamberfeld, but to Bragg it wasn’t an order he was
following anymore. He was a generous-hearted man, and he hated seeing a fellow Ghost in such a bad way. “Vambs?
They’re all waiting!”
Through the glade, the land opened out into a wide, banking pasture dotted with wildflowers and heaps of stone. In
one corner, against the line of the trees, Bragg saw the min of an old lean-to, a herdsman’s shelter. He made his way
towards it, calling Vamberfeld’s name.
There were many chelon in the pasture, Vamberfeld noted. Not enough to be worth the drive to market, but the basis
of a good herd. The cows were nosing together piles of leaf mulch ready to receive the eggs they would lay before
the next new moons.
The girl sat cross-legged outside her lean-to, and sprang up warily the moment she saw Vamberfeld approaching.
“Wait, wait please…” he called. The words sounded funny. His tongue was still swollen from the bite he’d put
through it in his fit, and he was self-conscious about the way it made his voice sound.
She disappeared into her hut. Cautiously, he followed.
The hut was empty except for old leaf-litter and a few sticks. For a moment, he thought she might be hiding, but
there was nowhere to hide, and no loose boards at the rear through which she might have slipped. A couple of old
jiddi-sticks lay on the floor inside the door, and on a hook on the wall hung the head-curl of a broken crook. It was
very old, and the jagged end where it had snapped was dirty and worn. He took it down and turned it over in his
hands.
“Vambs? Vambs?”
It took him a minute to realise the voice outside was calling his name. He went back out into the sunlight.
“Hey, there you are,” said Bragg. “What were you doing?”
“Just… just looking,” he said. “There was a girl and she…” He stopped. He realised that the pasture was empty
now. There were no lowing chelons, no leaf-nests. The field was growing wild with weeds.
“A girl?”
“No, nothing. Don’t worry about it.”
“Come on, we’re ready to go now.”
They walked back to the sooka and rejoined the Chimera. Vamberfeld felt strangely dislocated and confused. The
girl, the livestock. He’d definitely seen them, but…
It was only when they were underway again that he realised he was still holding the broken crook. He suddenly
felt painfully guilty, but by then it was too late to go back and return it.
Despite Curth’s best efforts, another of the casualties had died. Kolea nodded when she came to tell him and made an
entry in the mission log. Night was falling over Bhavnager, the fourth since the honour guard had gone ahead. No vox
contact had been made with them since then, though Kolea was confident that they might be well up into the Sacred
Hills by now.
He’d just come back from an inspection tour of the stronghold. They’d made a good job of securing the town. The
two Hydras Gaunt had left him guarded the approach highway where the Ghosts themselves had come in. The armour
waited in the market place, ready to deploy as needed, except the Destroyer Death Jester, which was lurking on
watch in the ruins of the temple precinct. Both south and north edges of the town were well defended by lines of
Ghosts in slit trenches and strongpoints. Available munitions had been divided up so there was no single, vulnerable
armoury point, and the emptied Chimera carriers retasked as troop support. The Conquerors had used their dozer
blades to push rubble and debris into roadblocks and protective levees, drastically reducing the possible points of
entry into the town. Chances were, if an attack came, they would be outnumbered. But they had the fabric of the town
itself working for them and had made the best use of their weapons.
“When did you last sleep?” Kolea asked the surgeon, offering her a chair in the little ground floor room of the
town hall that he’d taken as his command post. A long-gain vox-caster set burbled meaninglessly to itself in the
corner next to the sideboard where his charts were laid out. Grey evening light poked in through the sandbags piled
at the glass-less window.
“I can’t remember,” she sighed, sitting down and kicking off her boots. She massaged her foot through a threadbare
sock and then realised what she was doing.
“I’m sorry,” she said. “That was very undignified.”
He grinned. “Don’t mind me.”
She sat back and stretched out her legs, gazing down over her chest at her toes as she wiggled them. The socks
were worn through at the toes and heels.
“Gak! Look at me! I was respectable once!”
Kolea poured two generous glasses of sacra from a bottle Varl had given him and handed one to Curth.
“That’s where you have me beat. I was never respectable.”
“Oh, come on!” she smiled, taking the glass. “Thanks. You were a star worker back home, respectable mine
worker, family man…”
“—Well…”
“Gak!” she said suddenly, through a sip of the liquor. Her heart-shaped face was suddenly serious. “I’m sorry,
Gol, I really am.”
“What for?”
“The family man thing… That was really very crass of me…”
“Please relax. It’s alright. It’s been a while. I just think it’s interesting, the way war is such a leveller. But for war,
you and I would never have met. Never have spoken. Never have even been to each other’s sectors of the city.
Certainly never sat down with a drink together and wiggled our dirty toes at each other.”
“Are you saying I was a snob?” she asked, still smiling at his last remark.
“I’m saying I was an out-habber, a miner, lowest of the workforce. You were a distinguished surgeon running an
inner hab collective medical hall. Good education, decent social circles.”
“You make me sound like some pampered rich kid.”
“I don’t mean to. I just mean, look at what we were and now look at where we are. War does some strange
things.”
“Admittedly.” She paused and sipped again. “But I wasn’t a snob.”
He laughed. “Did you know any out-habbers well enough to call them by their first name?”
She thought hard. “I do now,” she said, “which is the real point The point I have a feeling you were making
anyway.”
He raised his glass to her and she toasted him back.
“To Vervunhive,” he said.
“To Vervunhive and all her hivers,” she said. “Gak, what is this stuff?”
“Sacra. The poison of choice for the men of Tanith.”
“Ah.”
They sat a moment more in silence, hearing the occasional shouted order or chatter outside. “I should be getting
back to the infirmary,” she began. “You need rest, Ana. Mtane can manage for a few hours.”
“Is that an order, Sergeant Kolea?”
“It is. I’m getting quite the taste for them.”
“Do you… think about them still?” she asked suddenly.
“Who?”
“Your wife. Your children. I’m sorry, I don’t mean to pry.”
“It’s alright. Of course I do. More than ever, just these last few days in fact.”
“Why?”
He sighed and stood up. “The strangest thing has happened. I haven’t told anyone. I haven’t been sure what to say,
or do for that matter.”
“I’m intrigued,” she said, leaning forward and cupping her glass.
“My dear Livy, and my two children… they all died in Vervunhive. I mourned them. I fought to avenge them for a
long time. Just that vengeance took me through the resistance fighting, I think.
But it turns out… my children aren’t dead.”
“They’re not? How? How do you know?”
“Here’s where it gets strangest of all. They’re here.”
She looked around.
“No, not in the room. Not on the planet now, I hope. But they’re with the Ghosts. They’ve been with the Ghosts
ever since Vervunhive. I just didn’t know it.”
“How?”
“Tona Criid. You know her?”
“I know Tona.”
“She has two children.”
“I know. They’re with the regimental entourage. I gave them their jabs myself during the medical screening.
Healthy pair, full of… of… oh, Gol.”
“They’re not hers. Not by birth. Bless Criid’s soul, she found them in the warzone and took them into her
protection. Guarded them throughout the war and brought them with her when she joined up. They regard her as their
mother, unquestioningly now. Young, you see. So very young. And Caffran, he’s as good as a father to them.”
She was stunned. “How do you know this?”
“I found out by chance. She has holos of them. Then I asked around, very circumspectly, and got the story. Tina
Criid rescued my kids from certain death. They now travel with our regiment in the support convoy. The price I pay
for that blessing is… they’re lost to me.”
“You’ve got to talk to her, tell her!”
“And say what? They’ve been through so much, wouldn’t this just ruin what chances for a stable life they have
left?”
Shaking her head, she held out her glass for a top-up. “You have to… They’re yours.”
He poured the bottle. “They’re content, and they’re safe. The fact that they’re even alive is such a big deal for me.
It’s like a… a touchstone. An escape from pain. It messed me up when I first found out, but now it… it seems to have
released me.”
She sat back thoughtfully. “This goes no further, of course.”
“Oh, of course. Doctor-patient confidentiality. I’ve been doing that my whole career.”
“Please, don’t even tell Dorden. He’s a wonderful man, but he’s the kind of medic who’d… do something.”
“My lips are sealed,” she began to say, but a vox signal interrupted. Kolea ran out into the square, leaving Curth to
pull her boots back on.
Mkvenner, his unit’s chief scout hurried up to him.
“Outer perimeter south has spotted movement on their auspex. Major movement. An armoured column of over a
hundred vehicles moving this way.”
“Gak! How far?”
“Twenty kilometres.”
“And… I have to ask… Not ours, by any chance.” Mkvenner smiled one of his lightless, chilling smiles. “Not a
chance.”
“Make ready,” Kolea said, sending Mkvenner on his way. Kolea adjusted his vox-link microbead. “Nine to all
unit chiefs. Respond.”
“Six, nine,” replied Varl.
“Eighteen, nine.” That was Haller.
“This is Woll, sergeant.”
“All stations to battle ready. Prime defenses. Arm weapons. Deploy armour to a southern line, plan alpha four.
The Infardi are coming. Repeat, the Infardi are coming.”
THIRTEEN
ERSHUL IN THE SNOW
“More snowflakes fall on the Holy Depths in a day than there are stars left for me to conquer.”
—Saint Sabbat, Biographica Hagia
They were halfway up the pass when the enemy began firing on them from the rear of the column.
It was ten o’clock on the morning of the seventh day, and the honour guard had been slow getting started. Snow
had blown in all night and lay at least forty centimetres deep, drifting to a metre in the open wind. Before dawn, with
the Ghosts and Pardus shivering in their tents, the snow had stopped, the sky had cleared and the temperature had
plummeted. Minus nine, the air caking the rocks and metal with first frost and then hard folds of ice.
The sun rose brightly, but took none of the edge off. It had taken over an hour to get some of the trucks and the old
Chimeras started. The men were slow and hangdog, grumbling at every move. Reluctantly, they tossed their packs up
into the troop transports and leapt up to take their places on ice-cold metal benches.
A heated oat and water mix had been distributed, and Feygor brewed up a chum of bitter caffeine for the officers.
Gaunt tipped a measure of amasec into each cup as it was handed round, and no one, not even Hark, protested.
Thermal kit and mittens had been brought as standard. The Munitorium had not underestimated the chill or the
altitude, but the biggest boon to all the Ghosts was their trademark camo-cape which now served each man as a cold
weather poncho. Zipped up to their throats in their fleece-lined crew-jackets and tank-leathers, the Pardus looked at
the Ghosts enviously.
They had broken camp at eight forty, and extended their column up through the snow-thick pass. Occasional
flurries whipped across them. The landscape was featureless and white, and the snow reflected the sunlight so
fiercely that glare-shades came out before the issue-order was even given.
No trace of the phantoms from the night before could be found on the auspex. The convoy moved ahead at less than
ten kph, churning and sliding as it groped for a track that was no longer identifiable.
The first few shells kicked up glittering plumes of snow. Near the head of the column, Gaunt heard the distinctive
crack-thump, and ordered his machine to come around.
There was still no visual contact with the chasing enemy, and nothing on the auspex, though Rawne and Kleopas
agreed that extreme cold made the sensor systems slow to function. It was also possible that the snow cover was
bouncing signals wildly, cheating and disguising the auspex returns.
Gaunt’s Salamander, bucking and riding over the snowfield and kicking up a wake of ice crystals, approached the
back end of the file in time to see a salvo of high explosive shells thump across the rank. One of the heavy Trojans
was hit and exploded, showering the white field with shrapnel and flaming scraps.
“One, four!”
“Four, one, go ahead.”
“Mkoll, keep your speed and pull the column ahead as fast as you can.”
Mkoll was riding a Salamander at the head of the line. “Four, one. Acknowledged.”
Gaunt exchanged voxes with the Pardus, and four tanks peeled back to support him: the Heart of Destruction, the
Lion of Pardua, the Say Your Prayers and the Executioner Strife.
“Full stop!” Gaunt told his driver, the heat of his breath billowing in clouds through the freezing air. As the light
tank slid to a halt. Gaunt turned to ayatani Zweil, who, with Commissar Hark and the Tanith scout Bonin, was riding
with him.
“This is no place for you, father. Bonin, get him down and escort him to the rear trucks.”
“Don’t fret Colonel-Commissar Gaunt,” said the old man, smiling. “I’d rather take my chances here.”
“Honestly, I would.”
“Right. Fine.”
More shells whoomed into the snow cover. A munitions Chimera trundling slowly towards the rear of the van was
hit a glancing blow but continued to struggle on.
“Auspex contact,” reported Hark from the lower level of the crewbay.
“Size? Numbers?”
“Nine marks, closing fast.”
“Roll!” Gaunt told the driver.
The command Salamander moved off, churning through the virgin snow. The three Conquerors and the old plasma
tank were circling round from the convoy after them.
The enemy came into view through the mouth of the pass. Four fast-moving SteG 4s, the six-wheeled light tanks,
fanning out ahead of three AT70s and a pair of Usurpers.
Their bright green paint jobs made them stand out starkly against the general white glare.
The SteGs, their big wheels wrapped in chains, were firing their light 40-mil weapons. Hypervelocity tank rounds
whistled over the command Salamander.
Gaunt heard the deeper crump of the 105-mil Reavers and the even deeper, less frequent thunder of the big
Usurpers.
Explosions dimpled the snow all around them.
“Tube!” Gaunt yelled to Bonin. Since Bhavnager, he’d kept a tread-fether in his machine The scout brought it up
loaded.
“Take us close,” Gaunt told the driver.
An AT70 made a hit on the Say Your Prayers, but the shot was stopped by the Conqueror’s heavy armour.
The Heart of Destruction and the Lion of Pardua fired almost simultaneously. The Heart overshot but the Lion
struck a SteG squarely and blew it over in the air.
With distance closing, Gaunt rose and aimed the tube at the nearest SteG. It was surging towards his bucking
machine, turret weapon firing.
“Ease!”
Gaunt fired.
His rocket went wide.
“You’re a worse fething shot than Bragg!” cursed Bonin. Zweil started to laugh uproariously. “Load me!”
instructed Gaunt.
“Loaded!” Bonin yelled, slamming the armed rocket into the breach.
The sky, mountainside and ground suddenly exchanged places. Gaunt found himself tumbling over and over in the
snow, winded.
A round from the SteG had hit the side of the Salamander, jerking it over hard. It had righted itself, but not before
Gaunt had been thrown clear. The wounded Salamander chugged to a halt, a sitting duck.
The SteG galloped up, swivelling its little turret to target the listing Salamander.
Spitting out snow, Gaunt got to his feet dazed. He looked about. The rear end of the missile launcher was jutting
out of the snow ten metres away from him. He ran over and pulled it out, feverishly tapping the packed snow out of
the tube mouth and the venturi.
Then he shouldered it and took aim, hoping to hell the fall hadn’t dented the tube or misaligned the rocket. If it had,
the tread-fether would explode in his hands.
The speeding SteG closed on the Salamander for the kill. Gaunt could see Hark standing up in the crewbay, firing
his plasma pistol desperately at the attacking vehicle.
Gaunt braced and put the crosshairs on the SteG.
It exploded, kicking up an enormous gust of snow and debris.
Gaunt hadn’t fired.
The Heart of Destruction roared past him in a spray of snow, smoke fuming from its muzzle break. “You okay,
sir?” Kleopas voxed.
“I’m fine!” Gaunt snapped, running towards the Salamander. Hark pulled him aboard.
“Are we alive still?” Gaunt snarled at Hark.
“Your scout’s down,” said Hark. Bonin lay in the footwell, concussed from the impact.
Zweil smiled through his beard and held up his wizened hands. “Me, I’m just dandy!” he declared.
“Could you see to Bonin?” Gaunt asked, and the ayatani jumped down, nursing Bonin into a braced, safe position.
“Move on!” cried Gaunt.
“S-sir?” the driver looked back out of the cave of the cockpit, terrified. Hark swept round and pointed his plasma
pistol at the Pardus crewman.
“In the name of the Emperor, drive!” he yelled.
The Salamander roared away across the snow. Gaunt looked out and took stock of the situation.
The Heart of Destruction and the Lion of Pardua had knocked out the last two SteGs, and Strife had blown up a
Reaver. The Say Your Prayers had been hit twice by Usurper shells and had come to a standstill. It looked intact, but
ominous black smoke was pouring out of its engine louvres.
As Gaunt’s Salamander slewed around, Strife fired on the nearest Usurper and detonated its munitions. Shrapnel
whickered down over several hundred metres.
Gaunt braced himself and fired at the nearest AT70. The rocket hit its track guard. The battle tank reared up in the
drifts and swung its turret around at the speeding Salamander. A heavy round blew into the snow behind them.
“Load me!” Gaunt demanded.
“Loaded!” Hark answered, and Gaunt felt the jolt of the rocket slamming home.
He took aim at the Infardi battle tank and fired.
Trailing smoke, the missile sped over the snow and hit the tank at the base of its turret. Internal explosions blew
the hatches out and then burst the barrel off the tank-head.
Zweil whooped.
“Load me!” said Gaunt. “Loaded!” said Hark.
But the battle was all done. The Lion of Pardua and the Heart of Destruction targetted and killed the remaining
Usurper pretty much simultaneously and the Say Your Prayers, suddenly coughing back into life, crippled and then
killed the last of the Reaver AT70s. Mechanical wrecks, sobbing out plumes of black smoke, marred the sugar-white
perfection of the pass.
Kleopas’ Conqueror turned hard around in a swirl of snow and bounced back alongside Gaunt’s Salamander.
Kleopas appeared in the top hatch, holding his field cap in his hands and tugging at it. He pulled something off and
tossed it to Gaunt.
Gaunt caught it neatly. It was the cap-badge of the Pardus regiment, worked in silver.
“Wear the mark proudly, tank killer!” Kleopas laughed as his machine sped away.
Through his scope, Kolea saw the musters of the enemy as they came down through the fruit glade onto Bhavnager.
So many machines, so many troops. Despite his defences and his careful preparation, they would be overwhelmed.
There was a horde of them. A gakking horde, with armour to match.
“Nine to all units, wait for my command. Wait.”
The Infardi legion advanced and spread out. They were almost on top of them. Kolea held fast They would at least
make a good account of themselves. “Steady, steady…”
Without breaking stride, the enemy passed by. They bypassed Bhavnager and continued up into the rainwoods. In
under a half-hour, they were gone. “Why so sad?” asked Curth.
“They left us alone.”
“They’re going after Gaunt,” Kolea said.
She knew he was right.
It was like fething Nusera Crossing all over again. The way ahead was blocked. Through his scope, Corbec could
see a long line of green-painted armour and transport units crawling northwards up the wide, dry pass below him. A
legion strength force.
He shuffled back from the lip of the cliff and rose. Dizziness swirled through him for a moment. This cold, thin air
was going to take quite some getting used to.
Corbec crunched down the slope of scree and down onto the sooka where the Wounded Wagon was drawn up. His
team, pinch-faced and huddled in coats and cloaks, waited expectantly.
“We can forget it,” Corbec said. “There’s a fething great mass of enemy machines and troops heading north up the
pass.”
“So what now?” whined Greer.
They’d been making good time up the sooka trails through the high pastures of the foot hills. The old Chimera
seemed to respond better in the cooler climate. About an hour earlier they’d passed the edge of the tree-line, and
now vegetation of any land was getting thin and rare. The landscape had become a chilly, rock-strewn desert of pink
basalt and pale orange halite, rising in great jagged verticals and sheer gorges that forced the ancient herding path to
loop back and forth upon itself. The wind groaned and buffeted. Beyond, the awesome peaks of the Sacred Hills
were dark and smudged with what Sanian said were snowstorms at the higher altitude levels.
They huddled around the chart-slates, discussing options. Corbec could feel the welling frustration in his team,
especially in Daur and Dorden who, it seemed to him, were the only ones who felt the true urgency of the mission in
their hearts.
“These here,” said Daur, pointing to the glowing screen of the chart with numb fingers. “What about these? They
turn east about six kilometres above us.”
They studied the radiating pattern of sooka branches that stretched out like thread veins.
“Maybe,” said Milo.
Sanian shook her head. “This chart is not current. Those sooka are old and have been blocked for years. The
herdsmen favour the western pastures.”
“Could we clear a way through?”
“I don’t think so. This section here is entirely fallen away into the gorge.”
“Feth it all!” Daur murmured.
“There is perhaps a way, but it is not for our machine.”
“You said that about the sookas.”
“I mean it this time. Here. The Ladder of Heaven.”
Five thousand metres higher up and sixty kilometres to the north-west, the honour guard column climbed the ragged
high passes in the driving snow. It was past dark on the night of the seventh day, but still they pressed on at a
desperate crawl, headlamps blazing into the dark. Blizzarding snow swirled through the beams of their lights.
According to the last reliable auspex reading, an enormous enemy force was half a day behind them.
The route they were following, known as Pilgrim’s Pass, was becoming treacherous in the extreme. The track
itself, climbing at an incline of one in six, was no more than twenty metres broad. To their left rose the sheer cliffs of
the mountainside. To their right, invisible in the dark and the snow, it fell away in a scree-slope that tumbled almost
vertically down to the floor of the gorge six hundred metres below.
It was hard enough to read the road in the day. Everyone was tense, expecting a wrong turn to send a vehicle
tumbling off into the chasm. And there was also the chance of a rock-slide, or a simple loss of grip in the snow.
Every time the troop truck wheels slid, the Ghosts went rigid, expecting the worst… a long, inexorable slide to
oblivion.
“We have to stop, colonel-commissar!” Kleopas urged over the link.
“Noted, but what happens if it continues like this all night? Come the dawn, we might be so buried in snow we
can’t move again.”
Another hour, perhaps two, Gaunt thought. They could risk that much. In terms of distance, the Shrinehold was
close now. The duration of the journey was more determined by the conditions.
“Sabbat does love to test her pilgrims on the path,” chuckled Zweil, huddled up in a bed roll in the back of the
Salamander’s compartment.
“I’m sure,” said Gaunt. “Feth take her Holy Depths.”
That made the old priest laugh so heartily he started coughing.
If anything, the snow seemed to be getting heavier.
Suddenly, there came a series of unintelligible bursts on the vox. Rearlamps ahead of them in the pelting flakes
flashed and swung.
“Full stop!” Gaunt ordered and clambered out. He trudged forward into the wind and the driving snow, his boots
sinking thirty or forty centimetres into the drifts.
Revealed only at the last minute by the groping auspex and by the driver’s struggling eyesight, the track swung
hard around a spur, almost at forty-five degrees. Even this close, Gaunt could barely see it himself. One of the pair of
scout Salamanders fronting the column was dangling over the edge of the chasm, most of one entire track section
hanging in space. Gaunt hurried up through the headlamp beams of the machines behind, joined by other Ghosts and
vehicle crews. The four occupants of the stricken light tank: the Pardus driver, Vox-officer Raglon and Scout
Troopers Mklane and Baen, were standing in the crewbay of the teetering machine, frozen in place, not daring to
move.
“Steady! Steady, sir!” Raglon hissed as Gaunt approached. They could all hear rock and ice crumbling under the
body of the scout machine.
“Get a line attached! Come on!” Gaunt yelled. A Pardus driver hurried forward with a tow-hook, playing out the
plasteel-mesh cable. Gaunt took the hook and gently reached out, sliding it in place over one of the Salamander’s
hardpoint lugs.
“Tension! Tension!” he cried, and the electric drum of the vehicle behind them started to rotate taking up the slack
on the cable until the line was taut. The Salamander tilted back a little onto the track.
“Out! Now!” Gaunt ordered, and Raglon’s crew scrambled out onto the snowy trail, dropping to their knees and
gasping with relief.
The crews around them now began the job of hauling the empty machine back onto the path. Gaunt helped Mklane
up.
“I thought we were dead, sir. The road just wasn’t there anymore.”
“Where’s scout one?” asked Gaunt.
They all stopped dead and turned to look out into the darkness. They’d been so busy saving one machine, no one
had realised the other had vanished entirely.
He’d forced the pace, Gaunt reflected, and the scout crew had paid the price.
“Gaunt to convoy. Full stop now. We go no further tonight.”
“Maybe we do,” said ayatani Zweil, suddenly appearing at Gaunt’s side. He pointed up into the darkness and the
blizzarding snow. There was a light. Strong, yellow, bright, shining in the night above them.
“The Shrinehold,” said Zweil.
FOURTEEN
SHRINEHOLD
“In war, one must prepare for defeat. Defeat is the most insidious of our foes. It never comes the way we
expect.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, from A Treatise on the Nature of Warfare
The honour guard approached the Temple of the Shrinehold of Saint Sabbat Hagio at first light. The snows had
stopped, and the mountain scenery was perfect, sculptural white under a golden sky.
The Shrinehold was a towering structure rising out of the basalt of a promontory spur that ran down from the icecapped
peak above. The road ran along the crest to a hefty gatehouse in the lower of two concentric walls. Within
those walls stood the close-packed buildings of the Shrinus Basilica, the monastery of the tempelum ayatani shrinus,
and a great square-sided tower topped by a golden gambrel roof with up-swept eaves. Prayer flags and votive kites
fluttered from the tower. The buildings and walls of the Shrinehold were pink basalt. Shutters and doors were
painted a bright gloss red and their frames edged in white. Beyond the walls and the tower, at the very edge of the
promontory, stood a massive stone pillar of black corundum on top of which the eternal light of the signal fire
burned.
Gaunt halted the column on the causeway before the gate and approached on foot with Kleopas, Hark, Zweil,
Rawne and an escort of six Ghosts. True to Sergeant Mkoll’s estimate, it had taken eight days to make the journey.
They needed to expedite the business here if they were going to make it back to the Doctrinopolis in the ten days
remaining before complete evacuation. Gaunt didn’t even want to start thinking about how hard that journey was
going to be The Infardi were closing on their heels in huge numbers and as far as he knew there was no other way
down from the Sacred Hills.
The gigantic red doors under the grim carved aquila on the gatehouse swung open silently as they approached, and
they strode in up the steps. Six blue robed ayatani brothers bowed to them but said nothing. They were taken up a
wide flight of stone steps, which had been brushed clear of snow, to the gate in the inner wall, and then through into a
lofty entrance hall.
The place was smoky brown and gloomy, with light entering through high windows, cold and pure. Gaunt could
hear chanting, and the sporadic chiming of bells or gongs. The air was full of incense smoke.
He removed his cap and looked around. Colourful gleaming mosaics decorated the walls, showing the saint at
various points in her hallowed life. Small holographic portraits set into lit alcoves along one wall depicted the great
generals, commanders and Astartes who had served during her crusade The great banner standard of Sabbat, an
ancient and worn swathe of material, was suspended from the arched roof.
Ayatani of the tempelum ayatani shrinus entered the hall through the far doors, approached the Imperial retinue and
bowed. There were twenty of them, all old, calm-faced men with tight, wrinkled skin worn by wind and cold and
altitude.
Gaunt saluted. “Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt, commander of the Tanith First, Imperial Crusade Liberation
Army. These are my chief officers, Major Rawne, Major Kleopas and Commissar Hark. I am here under orders from
Lord Militant General Lugo.”
“You are welcome to the Shrinehold, sir,” said the leader of the brothers, his blue robes a deeper shade of violet.
His face was as weatherbeaten as his colleagues’, and his eyes had been replaced by an augmetic visor that made his
stare milky and blank, like chronic cataracts. “My name is Cortona. I am ayatani-ayt of this temple and monastery.
We welcome you all to the shrine, and praise your diligence in making the arduous trek here at this time of year.
Perhaps you will take refreshment with us? You are also free to make devotion at the shrine of course.”
“Thank you, ayatani-ayt. Refreshment would be welcome, but I should make clear that the urgency of my mission
means I have little time to spare, even for pious observances.”
The Imperials were taken through into an anteroom where soda farls, dried fruit and pots of a warm, sweet
infusion were laid out on low, painted tables. They sat: Gaunt and his men on squat stools; the ayatani, including
Zweil, on floor mats. Refreshment was passed round by junior esholi in white robes.
“I am touched that your lord general has seen fit to be concerned for our welfare,” Cortona continued, “but I fear
your mission here has been a waste of effort. We are fully aware of the enemy forces that seek to overran this world,
but we have no need of defence. If the enemy comes, the enemy comes and that will be the way of things. Our holy
saint believed very much in natural fate. If it is decreed by destiny that this Shrinehold should fall to the enemy, and
that our lives are to be forfeit, then it is decreed. No amount of tanks and soldiers can change that.”
“You’d let the Chaos breed just walk in?” Rawne asked, incredulously.
“Watch your mouth, major!” Hark hissed.
“It is an understandable question,” said Cortona. “Our belief system may be hard to comprehend for minds versed
and schooled in war.”
“Saint Sabbat was a warrior, ayatani-ayt,” Gaunt pointed out smoothly.
“She was. Perhaps the finest in the galaxy. But she is at rest now.”
“Your concerns are moot anyway, with respect, father,” Gaunt went on. “You have misjudged our purpose here.
We have not been sent to defend you. Lord General Lugo has ordered me to recover the relics of the saint and escort
them with full honour to the Doctrinopolis, prior to the evacuation of Hagia.”
The calm smile never left Cortona’s face. “I fear, colonel-commissar, that I can never allow that to happen.”
“You quite took my breath away,” murmured Zweil. “I never imagined that was why you were coming to the
Shrinehold! Bead’s blood, colonel-commissar! What were you thinking?”
“I was obeying orders,” said Gaunt. They stood together on the terrace of the Shrinehold’s inner wall, looking out
across the bright snows towards the gorge.
“I thought you’d been sent to protect this place! I knew the tempelum ayatani would be none too pleased with a
military intervention, but I left that to you.”
“And if I’d told you my full purpose, would you have advised me to turn back?”
“I would have told you what ayatani-ayt just told you. The saint’s relics can never be taken from Hagia. It’s one of
the oldest doctrines, her deathbed prophecy. Even the likes of this General Lugo, or your esteemed Warmaster
Macaroth, would be fools to break it!”
“I’ve read it. You know I’ve read the gospels closely. I just assumed it was… a whim. A minor detail.”
Zweil shook his head. “I think that’s where you keep going wrong, my boy. Half the time you read the scriptures
hunting for absolute literal sense, the other half you try too hard to decipher hidden meanings! Textual interpretation
indeed! You need balance You need to understand the fundamental equilibrium of faith as it matters to us. If you
expect the ayatani to devoutly and strictly keep the customs and relics and traditions of the beati alive then you must
equally expect us to treat the instruction of her scriptures with absolute conviction.”
“It is written,” Gaunt began thoughtfully, “that if the remains of Saint Sabbat are ever taken from Hagia, if they are
ever removed by accident or design, the entire Sabbat Worlds will fall to Chaos forever.”
“What’s not clear about that?”
“It’s an open prophecy! A colourful myth designed to intensify devotion and worship! It couldn’t actually happen!”
“No?” Zweil gazed out across the Sacred Hills. “Why not? You believe in the saint, in her works, in her
incorruptible sanctity. Your belief in her and all she represents shines from you. It brought you here. So why
wouldn’t you believe in her deathbed prophecy?”
Gaunt shrugged. “Because it’s too… insane! Too big, too far-fetched! Too unlikely…”
“Maybe it is. Tell me, do you want to test it by taking her from this world?”
Gaunt didn’t reply.
“Well, my boy? Do you know better than the sector’s most venerated martyr? Does Lugo or the Warmaster? Will
you risk losing everything, a thousand inhabited systems, forever, just to find out? Never mind your orders or their
seniority, have they the right to take that risk either, or order you to do it?”
“I don’t believe they do. I don’t believe I do,” replied Gaunt quietly after a long pause.
“I don’t believe you even have to consider the question,” said Hark, approaching them from behind. “You have
utterly unambiguous orders, sir. They leave no room for interpretation. Lugo made your duty plain.”
“Lugo made a mistake,” Gaunt said, fixing Hark with a clear, hard stare. “It’s not one I care to take any further.”
“Are you breaking orders, sir?” asked Hark.
“Yes, I am. It hardly matters. My career’s over, my regiment’s finished, and there’s every chance we won’t get out
of here alive anyway. I’m breaking orders with a clear conscience, because it’s about fething time I showed a bit of
backbone and stopped blindly obeying men who are clearly and demonstrably wrong!”
Zweil’s gaze darted back and forth between the two Imperial officers in total fascination, hanging on every word.
Hark slowly put on his silver-braided cap, sighed heavily, and moved his hand to open the button-down cover of his
holster.
“Oh, don’t even bother, Hark,” Gaunt snarled contemptuously and walked away.
They were high enough now for the snow that Sanian had warned them about to become a reality. It was light but
persistent, and settled on their clothes and eyelashes. Further up the pass, snow clouds choked visibility so badly the
great mountains themselves were temporarily invisible, masked out by the storm.
They had finally said goodbye to the Wounded Wagon two hours earlier, abandoning it at a point on the sooka
where an old rockslide had long since carried the last of the negotiable track away. Loading up with everything they
could carry, they had continued on foot.
The track was as thin and desolate as the air. To their right towered the sheer south faces of the innermost and
highest Sacred Hills. To their left, a great slope of scree and bare rock arced downwards into the mysterious
shadows of gorges and low passes far below. Every few steps, one of them caught a loose stone with their toe, and it
would skitter and slither away down the decline.
The Ladder of Heaven had been cut by early pilgrims soon after the foundation of the Shrinehold six millennia
before. They had engineered the work with zealous enthusiasm, seeing it as a sacred task and an art of devotion. A
fifty kilometre staircase rising four thousand metres up into the peaks, right to the Shrinehold. Few used it now,
Sanian had explained, because the climb was arduous, and even hardy pilgrims preferred the march up the passes.
But that softer option wasn’t open to them now.
Sanian led them to the foot of the Ladder as the first snows began.
It didn’t look like much. A narrow, worn series of steps carved into the mountainside itself, eroded by weather
and age. Lichens clung like rust to the surfaces. Each step was about sixteen centimetres high, a comfortable enough
pace, and the steps were uniformly two metres deep from front to back, except where they sectioned and turned. The
Ladder wove up through the rocks and disappeared above them.
“This looks easy enough,” said Greer, stepping lightly up the first few.
“It isn’t, I assure you. Especially with the weather closing like this. Pilgrims used to choose this approach as an
act of chastening,” said Sanian.
They started up, Greer eagerly hurrying ahead, followed by Daur, Corbec and Dorden, then Milo and Sanian,
Nessa, Derin and finally Vamberfeld and Bragg.
“He’ll kill himself if he doesn’t pace his climb,” Sanian told Milo, pointing to Greer far ahead of them.
The main group fell into a rhythm. After about twenty minutes, Corbec began to feel oppressed by the sheer
monotony of the task. He started to roam with his mind, trying to occupy his thoughts. He considered the distance and
altitude, the depth and width of the steps. He did a little sum or two in his head.
“How many steps do they say there are?” he called back to Sanian.
“They say twenty-five thousand.” Dorden groaned.
“That’s just what I made it,” Corbec beamed, genuinely pleased with himself.
Fifty kilometres. Troops could cover that in a day, easy. But fifty kilometres of steps…
This could take days. Hard, painful, bone-numbing days.
“I maybe should have asked you this about five hundred metres ago, Sanian, but how long does this climb usually
take?”
“It depends on the pilgrim. For the dedicated… and the fit… five or six days.”
“Oh sacred feth!” Dorden groaned aloud.
Corbec concentrated on the steps again. Snow was beginning to settle on them. In five or six days, when they
reached the Shrinehold, Gaunt should be virtually all the way back to the Doctrinopolis if he was going to make the
evac. They were wasting their time.
Then again, there was no way in creation Gaunt’s honour guard was going to get down the mountain past that
Infardi host. Chances were he’d use the Shrinehold as his base and fight it out from there.
They’d have to wait and see. There was no point in going back now. There was nothing to go back for.
Alone, Ibram Gaunt pulled back the great old bolt and pushed open the door of the Shrinehold’s sepulchre. The
voices of male esholi filtered out, singing a solemn, harmonious, eight-part chant. Cold wind moaned down the
monastery’s deep airshafts.
He didn’t know what to expect. He realised he had never imagined coming here. Slaydo, the Emperor rest him,
would have been envious.
The room was surprisingly small, and very dark. The walls were lined with black corundum that reflected none of
the light from the many rows of burning candles. The air smelled of smoke, and musty dryness, the dust of centuries.
He stepped in, closing the door after him. The floor was made of strange, lustrous tiles that shimmered in the
candlelight and made an odd, plastic sound as he walked on them. He realised they were cut and polished sections of
chelon shell, pearlescent, with a brown stain of time.
To either side of where he stood were alcove bays in the corundum. In each glowed a life-size hologram of a
White Scars Space Marine, power blades raised in salutes of mournful triumph.
Gaunt walked forward. Directly ahead of him was the reliquary altar. Plated with more polished chelon shell, it
shone with ethereal luminescence. Inlaid on its raised front was a beautiful mosaic of coloured shell pieces
depicting the Sabbat Worlds. Gaunt had no doubt it was cartographically precise. Behind the altar rose a huge,
domed cover that overhung the altar block like a cowl. It was fashioned from a single chelon shell, a shell that had
come from an incredibly massive animal, far larger than anything Gaunt had seen on Hagia. Beneath it, behind the
altar, lay the reliquary itself, a candlelit cavern under the shell. At the front were two hardwood stands with open
lids in which, behind glass, lay original manuscripts of the gospels.
Gaunt realised his heart was beating fast. The place was having an extraordinary effect on him.
He moved past the gospel stands. To his left stood a casket on which lay various relics half-wrapped in satin.
There was a drinking bowl, a quill pen, a jiddi-stick worn black with age, and several other fragments he couldn’t
identify.
To his right, on top of another, matching casket, lay the saint’s Imperator armour, painted blue and white. It showed
the marks of ancient damage, blackened holes and grooves, jagged dents where the paint had been scraped off. The
marks of the nine martyring wounds. There was something odd about it. Gaunt realised it was… small. It had been
purpose-built for a body smaller than the average male Space Marine.
Ahead of him, at the very rear of the shell dome, lay the holy reliquary, a bier covered in a glass casket.
Saint Sabbat lay within.
She had wanted no stasis field or power suspension, but still she was intact after six thousand years. Her features
had sunk, her flesh had desiccated, and her skin was dark and polished. Around her skull there were traces of fine
hair. Gaunt could see the rings on her mummified fingers, the medallion of the Imperial eagle clasped in her hands
across her bosom. The blue of her gown had almost entirely faded, and the dry husks of ancient flowers lay around
her on the velvet padding of the bier.
Gaunt didn’t know what to do. He lingered, unable to take his eyes off the taut, withered but incorruptible form of
the beati.
“Sabbat. Martyr,” he breathed.
“She’s under no obligation to answer you, you know.” He looked around. Ayatani Zweil stood beyond the altar,
watching him.
Gaunt made a dignified, short bow to the saint and walked back out past the altar to Zweil.
“I didn’t come for answers,” he whispered.
“You did. You told me so, as we were coming from Mukret.”
“That was then. Now I’ve made my choice.”
“Choices and answers aren’t the same thing. But yes, you have. A fine choice, may I add. A brave one. The right
one.”
“I know. If I doubted that before, I don’t now I’ve seen this. We have no business moving her. She stays here She
stays here as long as we can protect her.”
Zweil nodded and patted Gaunt on the arm. “It’s not going to be a popular choice. Poor Hark, I thought he was
going to shit out a kidney when you told him.” Zweil paused, and looked back at the reliquary. “Forgive my coarse
language, bead. I am but a poor imhava ayatani who ought to know better in this holy place.”
They left the sepulchre together, and walked down the drafty hall outside.
“When will you make your decision known?”
“Soon, if Hark hasn’t told everyone already.”
“He may remove you from command.”
“He may try. If he does, you’ll see me breaking more than orders.”
Night was falling, and another storm of snow was racing down from the north-west. Ayatani-ayt Cortona had
allowed the Imperial forces to pitch their camp inside the outer wall of the Shrinehold, and the space was now full
of tents and chemical braziers. The convoy vehicles had been drawn up in the lea of the wall outside except for the
fighting machines, which had ranged out and dug in, hull down, to guard the approach up the gorge to the promontory.
Troop positions had also been dug in the snow banks outside and the heavy weapons fortified. Anything coming up
the pass was going to meet heavy resistance.
Making use of an anteroom in the monastery, Gaunt assembled the officers and section chiefs of the honour guard.
The Shrinehold esholi brought food and sweet tea, and none of the priesthood complained about the amasec and
sacra being portioned around. Ayatani-ayt Cortona and some of his senior priests had joined them. The lamps
twitched and snowstorm winds banged at the shutters Hark stood at the back of the room, alone, brooding.
Before he went in to join them, Gaunt took Rawne to one side, out in the chilly hall.
“I want you to know this first,” Gaunt told him. “I intend to disobey Lugo’s orders. We are not moving the saint.”
Rawne arched his eyebrows. “Because of this fething stupid old prophecy?”
“Exactly because of this fething stupid old prophecy, major.”
“Not because it’s all over for you?” asked Rawne. “Explain.”
Rawne shrugged. “We’ve known from the start that Lugo’s got you cold. When you return to the Doctrinopolis, be
it empty-handed or with this old girl’s bones, that’s the end. End of command, end of you, end of story. So as I see it,
you really haven’t got anything to lose, have you? Not to speak of. Telling Lugo to feth off and shove his orders up
his own very special Eye of Terror isn’t going to make things any worse for you. In fact, it might leave you feeling
better when they come to drag you away.”
“You think I’m doing this because I don’t care anymore?” asked Gaunt.
“Well, do you? This last week, you’ve not been the man I started serving under. The drinking. The rages. The foul,
foul fething moods. You failed. You failed badly. At the Doctrinopolis, you fethed up good and proper. You’ve been a
wreck ever since. Oh…”
“What?” growled Gaunt.
“Permission to speak candidly, sir. With effect retroactive.”
“Don’t you always, Rawne?”
“I fething hope so. Are you still drinking?”
“Well, I…”
“You want me to believe you’re right, that you’re doing this for real reasons and not just because you couldn’t give
a good feth about anything anymore, then smarten up. Clean up. Work it out. I’ve never liked you, Gaunt.”
“I know.”
“But I’ve always respected you. Solid. Professional. A warrior who works to a code. Sure, because of that code
Tanith burned, but you stuck by it no matter what anyone else thought. A man of honour.”
“That’s the closest you’ve ever come to complimenting me, major,” said Gaunt.
“Sorry sir, it won’t happen again. What I need to know is this… Is it that code now? Is it honour? This fething
mission is an honour guard… Do you mean it to deserve that title?”
“Yes.”
“Show me then. Show us all. Show us this isn’t just spite and bile and frustration coming out of you because you
fethed up and they caught you for it. Show us you’re not just a drunken wreck going down fast and bitterly trying to
take everything and everyone with you. It’s over for you, any way you cut it but it isn’t for us. If we go along with
you, the lord general will have us all court-martialled and shot. “We’ve got something left to lose.”
“I know,” said Gaunt. He paused for a moment and watched the driving snowflakes build and pile up against the
glass of the hall windows.
“—Well?”
“Would you like to know why this matters to me, Rawne? Why I took the disaster at the Doctrinopolis so badly?”
“I’d be fascinated.”
“I’ve given the better part of the last two decades to this crusade. I’ve fought hard every step of the way. And here
on Hagia, the blind stupidity of one man… our dear lord general… forced my hand and mined all that work. But it’s
not just that. The crusade that I’ve devoted these years to is in honour of Saint Sabbat, intended to liberate the planets
she first made Imperial worlds six thousand years ago. I hold her in special regard, therefore, and am dedicated to
her honour, and that bastard Lugo made me fail on the very world sacred to her. I didn’t just feth up during a crusade
action, major. I fethed up during a crusade action on the saint’s own holy shrineworld. But it’s not just that either.”
He paused and cleared his throat. Rawne stared at him in the gloom.
“I was one of Slaydo’s chosen, hand-picked to wage this war. He was the greatest commander I’ve ever known.
He took on this crusade as a personal endeavour because he was absolutely and utterly devoted to the saint. She was
his totem, his inspiration, the role model on which he had built his military career. He told me himself that he saw
this crusade as a chance to pay back that debt of inspiration. I will not dishonour his memory by failing him here.
Here, of all places.”
“Let me guess,” said Rawne. “It’s not just that either, is it?”
Gaunt shook his head. “On Formal Prime, in the first few months of the crusade, I fought alongside Slaydo in a
fierce action to take the hive towers. It was one of the first big successes of the crusade.
“At the victory feast, he brought his officers together. Forty-eight of us, the chosen men. We caroused and
celebrated. We all got a little drunk, Slaydo included. Then he… he became solemn, that bitter sadness that afflicts
some men when they are at their worse for drink. We asked him what was wrong, and he said he was afraid. We
laughed! Great Warmaster Slaydo, afraid? He got to his feet, unsteady. He was one hundred and fifty years old by
then, and those years had not been kind. He told us he was afraid of dying before finishing his work. Afraid of not
living long enough to oversee the full and final liberation of the beati’s worlds. It was his one, consuming ambition,
and he was afraid he would not achieve it.
“We all protested… he’d outlive us all! He shook his head and insisted that the only way he could ensure the
success of his sacred task, the only way he could achieve immortality and finish his duty to the saint, was through us.
He called for an oath. A blood oath. We used bayonets and fething table knives to cut our palms and draw blood. One
by one we clasped his bleeding hand and swore. On our lives, Rawne, on our very lives. We would finish his work.
We would pursue this crusade to its end. And we would damn well protect the saint against any who would harm
her!”
Gaunt held out his right hand, palm open. In the blue half-light, Rawne could still make out the old, pale scar.
“Slaydo fell at Balhaut, that battle of battles, just as he feared he would. But his oath lives on, and in it, Slaydo
too.”
“Lugo’s making you break your pact.”
“Lugo made me ride rough-shod through the saint’s Doctrinopolis and set ablaze her ancient temples. Now Lugo
wants me to defy the beati and disturb her final rest I apologise if I seemed to take any of that badly, but now perhaps
you can see why.”
Rawne nodded slowly.
“You had better tell the others,” he said.
Gaunt walked into the centre of the crowded anteroom, declined a drink offered to him by an esholi, and cleared his
throat. All eyes were on him and silence fell.
“In the light of developments in the field and… other considerations, I hereby inform you I am making an executive
alteration to our orders.”
There was a murmur.
“We will not be proceeding as per Lord General Lugo’s instruction. We will not remove the Shrinehold relics. As
of now, my orders are that the honour guard digs in here and remains in defence of the Shrinehold until such time as
our situation is relieved.”
A general outburst filled the room. Hark was silent.
“But the lord general’s orders, Gaunt—” Kleopas began, rising.
“Are no longer viable or appropriate. As field commander, judging things as they stand here on the ground, it is
within my purview.”
Intendant Elthan rose, quivering with rage. “But we’ll be killed! We have to return to the Doctrinopolis landing
fields by the timetable or we will not be evacuated! You know what’s coming, colonel-commissar! How dare you
suggest this!”
“Sit down, Elthan. If it helps, I’m sorry that non-combatants such as yourself and your driver crews have been
caught in this. But you are servants of the Emperor. Sometimes your duty is as hard as ours. You will obey. The
Emperor protects.”
A few officers and all the ayatani echoed the refrain.
“Sir, you can’t just break orders.” Lieutenant Pauk voice was full of alarm. Kleopas nodded urgently at his junior
officer’s words. “We’ll all face the strictest discipline. Lord General Lugo’s orders were simple and precise. We
can’t just disobey them!”
“Have you seen what’s coming up the pass behind us, Pauk?” Everyone turned. Captain LeGuin was standing at
the back of the room, leaning against the wall. “In terms of necessity alone, I’d say the colonel-commissar was
making a sound decision. We can’t get back to the Doctrinopolis now even if we wanted to.”
“Thank you, captain,” nodded Gaunt.
“Stuff your opinions, LeGuin!” cried Captain Marchese, commander of the Conqueror P48J. “We can always try!
That’s what the lord general and the Warmaster would expect! If we stay here and fight it out we might resist for the
next week or so. But once that fleet arrives, we’re dead anyway!”
Several officers, Ghosts among them, applauded Marchese’s words.
“We follow orders! We take up the relics and we break out now! Let’s take our chances in a stand-up fight against
the Infardi! If we fail, we fail! Better to die like that, in glory, than to wait it out for certain death!”
Much more support now.
“Captain Marchese, you should have been a commissar. You turn a good, rousing phrase.” Gaunt smiled. “But I am
commissar. And I am commander here. We stay, as I have instructed. We stay and fight.”
“Please reconsider, Gaunt!” cried Kleopas.
“But we’ll die, sir,” said Sergeant Meryn.
“And die badly, come to that,” growled Feygor.
“Don’t we deserve a chance, sir?” asked Sergeant Soric, pulling his stout frame upright his cap clasped in his
hands.
“Every chance in the cosmos, Soric,” said Gaunt. “I’ve considered all our options carefully. This is the right
way.”
“You’re insane!” squealed Elthan. He turned and gazed imploringly at Hark. “Commissar! For the Emperor’s sake,
do something!”
Hark stepped forward. The room went quiet. “Gaunt. I know you’ve considered me an enemy all along. I can see
why, but God-Emperor knows I’m not. I’ve admired you for years. I’ve studied how you’ve made command choices
that would have been beyond lesser men. You’ve never been afraid of questioning the demands of high command.”
Hark looked round at the silent room and then his gaze returned to Gaunt.
“I got you this mission, Gaunt. I’ve been with the lord general’s staff for a year now, and I know what kind of man
he is. He wants you to shoulder the blame for the Doctrinopolis to cover his own lack of command finesse.
“After the disaster at the Citadel, he would have had you drummed out on the spot. But I knew damn well you
were worth more than that. I suggested a final mission, this honour guard. I thought it might give you a chance to
redeem yourself, or at least finish your career on a note of respectability. I even thought it might give Lugo time to
reconsider and change his mind. A successful salvation of the shrineworld relics from under the nose of an
overwhelming enemy force could even be turned into a famous victory with the right spin. Lugo might come out a
hero, and you, consequently, might come out with your command intact.”
Hark sighed and straightened the front of his waistcoat. “You break orders now, there’s no coming back. You’ll put
yourself right where Lugo wants you. You’ll turn yourself into the scapegoat he needs. Furthermore, as an officer of
his personal commissariate, I cannot allow it. I cannot allow you to continue in command. I’m sorry, Gaunt. All the
way along, I’ve been on your side. You’ve just forced my hand. I hereby assume control of the honour guard, as per
general order 145.f. The mission will continue to the letter of our orders. I wish it could have been different, Gaunt.
Major Rawne, relieve Colonel-Commissar Gaunt of his weapons.”
Rawne rose slowly. He walked across the packed room to Gaunt and then stood at his side, facing Hark. “I don’t
think that’s going to happen, Hark,” he said.
“That’s insubordination, major,” murmured Hark. “Follow my instructions and relieve Gaunt of his weapons now
or I’ll have you up on charges.”
“I can’t have been clear,” said Rawne. “Go feth yourself.”
Hark closed his eyes, paused, opened them again and drew his plasma pistol.
He raised it slowly and aimed it at Rawne. “Last chance, major.”
“Who for, Hark? Look around.”
Hark looked around. A dozen sidearms were pointing at him, aimed by Ghost officers and a few Pardus, including
LeGuin and Kleopas.
Hark holstered his weapon. “I see you give me no choice. If we survive, this incident will be brought to the
attention of the Crusade commissariate, in full and frank detail.”
“If we survive, I’ll look forward to that,” said Gaunt. “Now let’s make ready.”
Out in the blizzarding night, at waymark 00.02 at the head of the pass, Scout-trooper Bonin and Troopers Larkin and
Lillo were dug into an ice bunker. They had a chemical heater puffing away in the base of the dug-out, but it was still
bitterly cold. Bonin was watching the portable auspex unit while Larkin hunted the flurrying darkness with the night
scope of his long-las. Lillo chaffed his hands, waiting by the tripod-mounted autocannon. “Movement,” Larkin said
quietly.
“Nothing on the screen,” replied Bonin, checking the glowing glass plate of the auspex.
“See for yourself,” said Larkin, moving aside so that Bonin could slide in to view through the scope of the
positioned sniper weapon.
“Where?”
“Left a touch.”
“Oh feth,” murmured Bonin. Illuminated in ghostly green, he could see blurs of light on the pass below. Hundreds
of lights were moving up the precipitous track towards them. Headlamps glaring in the falling snow.
“There’s lots of them,” said Bonin, moving back.
“You haven’t seen the half of it,” mumbled Lillo, staring at the auspex screen. Bright yellow sigils wobbled
around the contour lines of the holo-map. The tactical counter had identified at least three hundred contacts, but the
number was rising as they watched.
“Get on the vox,” said Larkin. “Tell Gaunt all fething hell is coming up the pass.”

FIFTEEN
THE WAITING
“Actual combat is a fleeting part of war. The bulk of soldiering is waiting.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, from A Treatise on the Nature of Warfare
When the snowing stopped just before dawn, the Infardi advance guard began their first assault up the top of the pass.
A bombardment was launched by their reserve tanks and self-propelled guns, but most of it fell short of the
Shrinehold walls. Six SteGs and eight Reavers churned through the snow towards the promontory, and a hurrying
line of four hundred troops followed them.
They were met by the Pardus armour and the dug-in sections of the Tanith First-and-Only. Hull-down, Grey
Venger picked off the first four armour units before they were even clear of the spur. Their burning carcasses dirtied
the snow-field with blackened debris and fire.
Heavy weapon emplacements opened up to meet the infantry. In a quarter of an hour, the white slopes were
scattered with green-robed dead.
A SteG and an AT70 pushed in past the outer defence, behind Grey Venger’s field of fire. They were met and
destroyed by Kleopas’ Heart of Destruction and Marchese’s P48J.
The Infardi fell back.
Gaunt strode into the tent where Ghost troopers were guarding the Infardi officer taken prisoner at Bhavnager. The
wretch was shivering and broken.
Gaunt ordered him to be released and handed him a small data-slate.
“Take this back to your brethren,” he said firmly.
The Infardi rose, facing Gaunt, and spat in his face.
Gaunt’s punch broke his nose and sent him tumbling onto the snowy ground.
“Take this back to your brethren,” he repeated, holding out the slate.
“What is it?”
“A demand for them to surrender.” The Infardi laughed. “Last chance… Go.”
The Infardi got up, blood from his nose spattering the snow, and took the slate. He went out through the gate and
disappeared down the slope.
The next time the Imperials saw him, he was strung spread-eagled across the front of an AT70 that was ploughing
up the approach to the outer line. The tank waited, stationary, as if daring the Imperials to shoot or at least daring
them to notice.
Then it fired its main gun. The screaming Infardi officer had been tied with his torso over the muzzle of the tank
cannon.
A conical spray of red gore covered the snow. The AT70 turned and trundled back to its lines. “An answer of
sorts, I suppose,” Gaunt said to Rawne.
On the Ladder, barely a quarter of the way up, Corbec’s team woke in the chill of dawn to find themselves half
buried in the overnight snow. Each of them had lain down on a step in their bedroll. Shaking and slow, they got up,
cold to the marrow. Corbec looked up the winding stairs. This was going to be murder.
For five straight days, the Infardi made no attempt to attack again. Gaunt was beginning to believe they were stalling
until the fleet’s arrival. For the Imperials dug in behind the Shrinehold defences, the waiting was becoming
intolerable.
Then, at noon on the fourteenth day of the mission, the enemy tried again.
Armour ploughed up out of the gorge, and shells wailed at the Shrinehold. Caught in the initial rush, the Conqueror
Say Your Prayers and two Chimera were lost. Smoke from the wreck of the dead Conqueror trailed up into the blue.
The rest of the Pardus armour met the assault and slugged it out. Ghosts under Soric and Mkoll ran forward from
their ice trenches and countered the enemy push on foot up the pass.
From their dug-outs, the Tanith snipers began to compete, Larkin could outscore Luhan easily enough, but Banda
was something else. Seeing a competition, Cuu put money on it. His wager, Larkin was furious to discover, was on
the Verghastite loom-girl.
It took two straight hours for the Imperials to repulse the attack. They were exhausted by the end of it.
On the sixteenth day, the Infardi tried yet again, in major force. Shells hit the Shrinehold’s walls and tower. A
blizzard of las-fire streaked the air, raining on the Imperial lines. Once they could see they were hurting their enemy,
the Infardi charged, five or maybe six thousand cultist-warriors, pouring in through the advancing files of their war
machines. From the wall, Gaunt saw them coming. It was going to be bloody.
High up on the punishing Ladder of Heaven which seemed to go on forever, Corbec stopped to get his breath back.
He’d never known exhaustion like this, or pain, or breathlessness. He knelt down on the snow-covered step.
“Don’t… don’t you dare go… go quitting on me now!” Dorden exclaimed, vapour gusting from his lips, as he
tried to pull Corbec to his feet. The chief medic was thin and haggard, his skin drawn and pale, and he was
struggling for breath.
“But doc… we should never… never have even tried…”
“Don’t you dare, Corbec! Don’t you dare!”
“Listen! Listen!” Daur called back to them. He and Derin were about forty steps above them, silhouetted against
the bright white sky.
They heard a rolling roar that wasn’t the constant wind. A buffeting, thunderous drone, mixed over what they
slowly realised were the voices of thousands of howling, chanting men.
Corbec got up. He wanted to just lie down and die. He couldn’t feel his feet anymore. But he got up and leaned
against Dorden.
“I think, my old friend, we might be there at last. And I think we’ve arrived at a particularly busy time.”
A few steps behind them, the others had caught up, all except Greer who was now lagging a long, long way
behind. Bragg and Nessa sat down in the snow to catch their breaths. Vamberfeld stood panting with his eyes closed.
Milo looked at Sanian, whose weary face was clouded by what he supposed to be grief.
It wasn’t. It was anger.
“That’s the sound of war,” she wheezed, fighting her desperate fatigue. “I know it. Not enough that war comes to
my world, that it tears through my home town. Now it comes here, to the most sacred place of all, where only peace
should be!”
She looked up at Dorden. “I was right you see, doctor? War consumes everything and everyone. There is only war.
Nothing else even matters.”
They clambered on, up the last few hundred metres of curling staircase soul-weary and delirious with cold and
hunger. But to know the end was at hand lifted them up for that last effort.
The sounds of the combat grew louder, magnified by the echoes that came off the mountain faces and the gorge.
They readied their weapons with trembling, clumsy hands, and advanced. Corbec and Bragg covered the way
ahead, taking one step at a time.
The steps ended in a wide snow-covered platform of rock, the cliff edge of which showed the ancient traces of a
retaining wall. They were climbing up onto a great promontory of rock, a flat-topped buttress of mountain that stuck
out from the mountainside above a vast gorge. A walled, keep-like structure that could only be the Shrinehold itself
lay to their left, dominating the promontory. Between it and the place where the wide promontory extended out from
the top of the pass, full-scale battle raged. They were bystanders, hidden from view half a kilometre from the edge of
the righting. Banks of sooty smoke and ash rolled through the freezing mountain air.
A tide of Infardi war machines and troops, inexorable as a glacier, was moving forward from the head of the pass
and up the promontory past them. In the sloping snowfield in front of the Shrinehold, the Chaos forces were being
met head-on by the Imperial defenders. Shell holes had been torn in the Shrinehold’s outer wall, and vehicles were
on fire. The fighting was so thick they could barely make sense of it.
“Come on,” said Corbec.
“We’re going into that?” moaned Greer. “We can barely walk anymore, you crazy bastard!”
“That’s Colonel Crazy Bastard to you, pal. No, we’re not going into that. Not directly. We’ll follow the edge of
this promontory around. But that’s where we’re going, and we’ve got to get in there sooner or later. Dead on my
damned feet I may be, but I’ve come a fething long way to be part of this.”
Gaunt was in the thick of the fighting at the foot of the outer wall. He hadn’t been in a stand-up fight this fierce since
Bal-haut. It was so concentrated, so direct. The noise was bewildering.
Nearby, Lieutenant Pauk’s Executioner was firing beam after beam of superheated plasma into the charging ranks,
leaving lines of mangled corpses in the half-melted snow. Both the Heart of Destruction and the Lucky Bastard had
run out of main gun shells, and were reduced to bringing in their bulk and coaxial weapons in support of the Ghosts.
Brostin, Neskon and the other flame troopers were out on the right flank, spitting gouts of yellow flame down the
field that turned the hard-packed snow to slush and sent Infardi troops screaming back, their clothes and flesh on fire.
The Imperials were holding, but in this hellish confusion, there was a chance that command coherency could be
lost as wave after wave of the Chaos-breed stormed forward.
Gaunt saw the first couple of enemy officers. Just energised blurs moving amongst their troops, each one protected
in the shimmering orb of a refractor shield. Nothing short of a point-blank tank round could touch them. He counted
five of them amid the thick echelons of advancing enemy. Any one of them might be the notorious Pater Sin, come all
this way to snatch his final triumph.
“Support me!” Gaunt cried to the fireteam at his heels, and they pushed out in assault tackling the Infardi,
sometimes hand to hand. Gaunt’s bolt pistol fired shot after shot, and the power sword of Heironymo Sondar
whispered in his fist.
Two Ghosts beside him were cut down. Another stumbled and fell, his left arm gone at the elbow.
“For Tanith! For Verghast! For Sabbat!” Gaunt yelled, his breath steaming the air. “First-and-Only! First-and-
Only!”
There was good support to his immediate left. Caffran, Criid, Beltayn, Adare, Memmo and Mkillian. Flanking
them, Sergeant Bray’s section, and the remains of a fireteam led by Corporal Maroy.
Scything with his sword, Gaunt worried about the right flank. He was pretty sure Corporal Mkteeg was dead, and
there was no sign of Obel’s section, or of Soric who, with Mkoll, had operational command of that quarter.
One of the Infardi officers was close now, cackling aloud, invisible in his ball of shield energy against which the
Imperial las-fire twinkled harmlessly. Using him as mobile cover, the Ershul foot troops were pounding at the
Ghosts. Memmo tumbled, headshot gone, and Mkillian dropped a second later, hit in the thigh and hip.
“Caffran! Tube him!” Gaunt yelled.
“It won’t breach the shield, sir!”
“Put it at his feet then! Knock the fether over!”
Caffran hurled a tube-charge, spinning it end over end. It bounced in the thick snowpack right at the Infardi
officer’s feet and went off brightly.
The blasts didn’t hurt the Ershul officer, but it effectively blew the ground out from under him and he fell, his
refractor shield hissing in the snow.
Gaunt was immediately on him, yelling out, stabbing down two-handed with his power blade. Criid, Beltayn and
Adare were right at his heels, gunning down the Ershul-lord’s bodyguard.
Power sword met refractor shield. The shield was a model manufactured by Chaos-polluted Mechanicus factories
on the occupied forgeworld Ermune. It was powerful and effective. The power sword was so old, no one knew its
original place of manufacture. It popped the shield like a needle lancing a blister.
The fizzling cloak of energy vanished and Gaunt’s sword blade plunged on, impaling the screaming Infardi
revealed inside.
Gaunt wrenched the sword out and got up. The Infardi nearby, those who hadn’t yet been dropped by his Ghosts,
backed off and ran in fear. By killing the officer in front of their eyes, he’d put a chink in their insane confidence.
But it was a tiny detail of triumph in a much greater battle-storm. Major Rawne, commanding units nearer to the main
gate, could see no respite in the onslaught. The Infardi were throwing themselves at his position as fast as his troops
in the snow-trenches and on the wall parapet could fire on them. A row of self-propelled guns was working up
behind the enemy infantry, and their munitions now came whistling down, throwing up great bursts of ice and fire.
Two shells dropped inside the wall and one hit the wall itself, blowing out a ten-metre chunk.
Rawne saw the Grey Venger advancing over the snow, streaking titanic stripes of laser fire at the Usurper guns.
One was hit and sent up a fiery mushroom cloud. Rocket grenades slapped and banged off the Venger’s hull. The
Lion of Pardua smashed directly through a faltering pack of Infardi troopers, dozer blade lowered, fighting to get a
shot at the heavy gun units too. A tank round, coming from Emperor alone knew where, destroyed its starboard tracks
and it lurched to a stop. The shrieking Infardi were all over it, mobbing the hull, their green figures swarming across
the crippled tank. Rawne tried to direct some of his troop fire to assist the Conqueror, but the range was bad and they
were too boxed in. Tank hatches were shot or blasted open, and the mob of Infardi dragged the Lion’s crew out
screaming.
“Feth, no!” Rawne gasped, his warm exhalation becoming vapour.
Without warning, another tank round hit the Lion, and blew it apart, exploding several dozen Infardi with it.
Killing the Imperial armour seemed to be all the enemy cared about.
In a snow-trench ten metres left of the major, Larkin cursed and yelled out “Cover me!” as he rolled back from his
firing position. Troopers Cuu and Tokar moved up beside the prone Banda and resumed firing.
The barrel of Larkin’s long-las had failed. He unscrewed the flash suppressor and then twisted and pulled out the
long, mined barrel. Larkin was so practiced at this task he could swap the XC 52/3 strengthened barrels in less than
a minute. But his bag of spares was empty.
“Feth!” He crawled over to Banda, shots passing close over his head. “Verghast! Where’re your spare rods?”
Banda snapped off another shot, and then reached round and pulled the clasp of her pack open. “In there! Down
the side!”
Larkin reached in and pulled out a roll of vizzy-cloth. There were three XC 52/3s wrapped in it. “This all you
got?”
“It’s all Twenish was carrying!”
Larkin locked one into place, checked the line, and rescrewed his suppressor. “They’re not going to last any
fething time at this pace!” he grunted.
“Should be more in the munition supplies, Tanith,” said Cuu, clipping a new power cell into his weapon.
“Yeah, but who’s going back into the Shrinehold to get them?”
“Point,” murmured Cuu.
Larkin blew on his mittened hands and began firing again. “What’s the tally?” he hissed at Banda.
“Twenty-three,” she said without looking round. Only two less than him. Feth, she was good. Then again, who
wouldn’t score when they had this many damned targets to fire at?
Rawne got a fireteam forward as far as the cover provided by one of their own burning Chimeras. Lillo, Gutes,
Cocoer and Baen dropped into the filthy snow beside him, firing through the raging smoke that boiled out of the
machine. A moment later, Luhan, Filain, Caill and Mazzedo moved up close and provided decent crossfire under
Feygor’s command.
Rawne waved a third team — Orul, Sangul, Dorro, Raess and Muril — round to the far side of the Chimera. They
were reaching position when an Infardi counter-push hit. Two rounds from an AT70 erupted like small volcanoes in
their midst. Filain and Mazzedo were obliterated instantly. Cocoer was gashed by flying metal and fell screaming.
Steam rose from his hot blood in the chill air. Gutes and Baen ran forward to drag the bawling, bloody Tanith into
cover, but Gutes was immediately hit in the leg by a las-round. Baen turned in surprise and took two hits in the lower
back. His arms lurched up and he fell on his face.
Infardi troops rushed in from the left, weapons blazing. In the savage short-range firelight that followed, first Oral
and then Sangul were killed by massive torso injuries. Dorro managed to get Baen and Cocoer into cover and then he
was hit in the jaw with such destructive force his head was virtually twisted off.
Rawne found himself pinned with Luhan, Lillo, Feygor and Caill, firing in support of Raess and Muril who were
closer to the trio of wounded Ghosts.
“Three! This is three! We’re pinned!”
The blackened wreckage of a Munitorium troop track fifty metres ahead splintered and rolled as something big
pushed it aside. For a moment Rawne felt relief, sure it was one of the Pardus Conquerors.
But it wasn’t. It was a SteG 4, squirming through the heavy snowcover on tyres that were encrusted with slush, oil
and blood.
“Feth! Back! Back!”
“Where the gak to, sir?” Lillo wailed.
The SteG fired and the whooping shell slammed through the dead Chimera.
There was a chilling wail from behind Rawne’s position. Part animal shriek, part pneumatic hiss, a sound that
swooped from high pitch to low. The output of a powerful beam weapon ripped into the front of the SteG and a rash
of pressurised flame blew out the side panels. It bounced to a halt, streaming smoke.
“Fall back! Get clear!” Commissar Hark yelled to Rawne and his soldiers as he fired again into the midst of a
charging Infardi platoon. They half carried and half dragged Gutes, Cocoer and Baen back the twenty metres to the
nearest snow-work cover.
“I’m surprised to see you,” Rawne told Hark flatly.
“I’m sure you are, major. But I wasn’t just going to sit in the Shrinehold and wait for the end.”
“You won’t have to wait long, commissar,” said Rawne, changing clips. “I’m sure you’ll be pleased to note that
this is it. The last stand of Gaunt and his Ghosts.”
“I…” Hark began and then fell silent. As a commissar, even an unpopular, unwelcome one, it was his foremost
duty to rally, to inspire the men and to quell just that kind of talk. But he couldn’t. Looking out at the forces that swept
in to overran and slaughter them, there was no denying it.
The cold-blooded major was right.
In the very heaviest part of the battle, Gaunt knew it too. Troopers fell all around him. He saw Caffran, wounded in
the leg, being dragged to cover by Criid. He saw Adare hit twice, convulse and drop. He saw two Verghastite
Ghosts thrown into the air by a shell burst He almost fell over the stiffening corpse of Trooper Brehl, the blood spats
from his wounds frozen like gemstones.
A las-round hit Gaunt in the left arm and spun him a little. Another passed through the skirt of his storm coat.
“First-and-Only!” he yelled, his breath smoking in the cold. “First-and-Only!”
Something happened to the sky. It changed abruptly from frozen chalk-white to fulminous yellow, swirling with cloud
patterns. A sudden, almost hot wind surged up the gorge.
“What the gak is that?” Banda murmured.
“Oh no,” mumbled Larkin. “Chaos madness. Fething Chaos madness.”
Silent auroras of purple and scarlet rippled across the sky. Crimson blooms swirled out and stained the sky like
ink spots in water. Lightning strikes, searing violet-white, sizzled and cracked down, accompanied by thunderclaps
so loud they shook the mountain.
The savage fighting foundered and ceased. Beneath the alien deluge, the Infardi fled back down to the pass,
leaving their wounded and their crippled machines behind them. The mass exodus was so sudden, they had cleared
the approach fields of the Shrinehold in less than ten minutes.
The Imperials cowered in terror beneath the twisting lightshow. Vehicle engines stalled. Vox signals went berserk
in whoops of interference and swarms of static. Many troopers wrenched their microbead ear-plugs out, wincing.
Vox-officer Raglon’s ears were bleeding by the time he’d managed to pull off his headset. Wild static charge filled
the air, crackling off weapons, making hair stand on end. Greenish corposant and ball lightning wriggled and flared
around the eaves and roofs of the Shrinehold.
In the face of final defeat, something had saved Gaunt’s honour guard, or at least allowed it a temporary reprieve.
Ironically, that something was Chaos.
“I have consulted the monastery’s sensitives and psyker-adepts,” said ayatani-ayt Cortona. “It is a warp storm, a flux
of the empyrean. It is affecting all space near Hagia.”
Gaunt sat on a stool in the Shrinehold’s main hallway, stripped to the waist as Medic Lesp sutured and bound up
his arm. “The cause?”
“The arch-enemy’s fleet,” replied Cortona.
Gaunt raised an eyebrow. “But that’s not due to reach us for another five days.”
“I don’t believe it has. But a fleet of that size, moving through the aether, would create a massive disturbance, like
the bow wave of a great ship, pushing the eddies and swirls of the warp ahead of it.”
“And that bow wave has just broken over Hagia? I see.” Gaunt stood up and flexed his bandaged arm. “Thanks,
Lesp. Immaculate needlework as ever.”
“Sir. I don’t suppose there’s any point advising you to rest it?”
“None whatsoever. We get out of this, I’ll rest it all you like.”
“Sir.”
“Now get to the triage station and do some proper work. There are many more needy than me.”
Lesp saluted, collected up his medicae kit and hurried out. Pulling on his shirt, Gaunt walked with Cortona to one
of the open shutters and gazed out at the seething, malign fury of the sky above the Sacred Hills.
“No getting off planet now.”
“Colonel-commissar?”
Gaunt looked round at the elderly high priest. “There’s nothing good about that storm, ayatani-ayt, but there’s some
satisfaction to be derived from it at least. If I had followed my orders and returned to the Doctrinopolis, I wouldn’t
have reached it until tomorrow, even under the best conditions. So even if I’d got in before the evacuation deadline,
I’d have been trapped.”
“Like Lugo and the last few hundred ships undoubtedly are,” said Hark, suddenly there and in the conversation. A
typical Hark-esque no-warning appearance.
“You sound almost pleased, Hark.”
“Hagia is about to be wiped from space, sir. Pleased is not the right word. But, like you, I wager, there is some
cruel delight to be drawn from the idea of Lord General Lugo suffering along with us.”
Gaunt began to button up the braid froggings of his tunic. “Major Rawne, another bête noir of yours, told me you
did us proud in the fight today. Saved him and a good many others.”
“It wasn’t service to you. It was service to the Golden Throne of Terra. I am a soldier of the Imperium and will
make a good account of myself until death, the Emperor protects.”
“The Emperor protects,” nodded Gaunt. “Look, commissar… for whatever it’s worth, I have no doubts as to your
courage, loyally or ability. You’ve fought well all the way along. You’ve tried to do your duty, even if I haven’t liked
it. It took, I have to admit, a feth of a lot of guts to stand up in that room and try and take command off me.”
“Guts had nothing to do with it.”
“Guts had everything to do with it. I want you to know that you’ll receive no negative report from me… if and
when I ever get to make one No matter what kind of report you choose to make. I bear you no ill will. I’ve always
taken my duty to the Emperor fething seriously. Completely fething seriously. How could I possibly resent another
man doing the same?”
“I… thank you for your civility and frankness. I wish things could have been… and could yet be… different
between us. It would have been a pleasure to serve with you and the First-and-Only without this cloud of resentment
hanging over me.”
Gaunt held out his hand and Hark shook it. “I think so too.”
The doors to the hall swung open and cold air billowed in, bringing with it Major Kleopas, Captain LeGuin,
Captain Marchese and the Ghost officers Soric, Mkoll, Bray, Meryn, Theiss and Obel. They stomped their boots and
brushed flakes from their sleeves.
“Join me,” Gaunt told Hark. They joined the officers.
“Gendemen. Where’s Rawne?”
“There was some perimeter alert, sir. He went to check it out,” said Meryn.
Gaunt nodded. “Any word on Corporal Mkteeg?”
“He was found alive, but badly shot up. They slaughtered his squad but for two other men,” said Soric.
“What is this, sir?” asked Corporal Obel. “What drove the Infardi back? I thought they had us there I really did.”
“They did, corporal. They honestly did. But for the damndest luck.” Gaunt quickly explained the nature of the
storm effects as best as he understood it. “I think this sudden warp storm shocked the Ershul. I think they thought it
was some apocalyptic sign from their Dark Gods and simply… lost it. It is an apocalyptic sign from their Dark
Gods, of course. That’s the down side. Once they’ve regrouped, they’ll be back, and stronger too, would be my
wager. They’ll know almighty hell is coming to help them.”
“So they’ll assault again?” asked Marchese.
“Before nightfall would be my guess, captain. We must restructure our force disposition in time to meet the
Ershul’s next attack.”
“Is that what we’re calling them now, sir?” asked Soric. “Call them whatever you like, Soric”
“Bastards?” suggested Kleopas. “Scum-sucking warp-whores?” said Theiss.
“Targets?” said Mkoll quietly. The men laughed.
“Whatever works for you,” said Gaunt. Good, there was some damn morale left yet.
“Bray? Obel? Drag over that table there. Captain LeGuin, I see you’ve brought charts. Let’s get to work.”
They’d just spread out the tank hunter’s maps when Gaunt’s vox beeped.
“One, go.”
It was Vox-officer Beltayn. “Major Rawne says to get out front, sir. Something’s awry.”
“Awry! Always with that nervous, understated awry! What’s actually awry this time, Beltayn?”
“Sir… it’s the colonel, sir!”
Gaunt ran out down the steps, through the snow lying between the inner and outer walls, towards the gate.
Rawne and a section of men were just coming in, bringing with them ten haggard, stumbling figures, caked in dirt
and rime, half-starved and weary.
Gaunt’s eyes widened. He came to a halt.
Trooper Derin. Try Again Bragg. The Verghastite Ghosts Vamberfeld and Nessa. Captain Daur, supporting a halfdead
Pardus officer Gaunt didn’t know. Dorden… Great God-Emperor! Dorden! And Milo, Emperor protect him,
carrying a Hagian girl in his arms.
And there, at the head of them, Colonel Colm Corbec. “Colm? Colm, what the feth are you doing here?” Gaunt
asked.
“Did… did we miss all the fun, sir?” Corbec whispered, and pitched over into the snow.
SIXTEEN
INFARDI
“It was always her greatest weapon. Surprise, you would call it, I suppose. The scope of her ability to produce
the unexpected. To turn the course of an engagement on its head, even the worst of defeats. I saw it happen many
times. Something from nothing. Triumph from disaster. Until the very end, when at the last, she could no longer
work her miracles. And she fell.”
—Warmaster Kiodrus, from The Path to the Nine Wounds: A History of Service with the Saint
The night of the sixteenth day fell, but it was not proper night. The surging maelstrom of the warp storm lit the sky
above the Shrinehold with pulses and cyclones of kaleidoscopic light and electromagnetic spectres. The snows had
ceased, and under the silent, flickering glare, the embattled Imperials stood watch at battle-readiness, gazing at the
reflections of the rapidly fluctuating colour patterns on the snowfield and the ice of the Sacred Hills.
It was the stillest time, almost tranquil. Vivid colour roiled and swelled, broke and ebbed, all across the heavens.
Barely a breeze stirred. Perhaps as a result of the warp-eddies, the temperature had risen to just above zero.
In an anteroom in the monastery, ayatani carefully lit the oil lamps and then left without a word.
Gaunt put his cap and gloves on a side table. “I… I’m very pleased you’re here, but the commissar in me wants to
know why. Feth, Colm! You were wounded and you had orders to evacuate!”
Corbec sat back on a daybed under the bolted, gloss-red shutters, his camo-cloak pulled around him like a shawl,
and a cup of hot broth in his hands.
“Both facts true, sir. I’m afraid I can’t really explain it.”
“You can’t explain it?”
“No, sir. Not without sounding so mad you’ll have me clapped in irons and locked in a padded cell immediately.”
“Let’s risk that,” said Gaunt. He’d poured himself a glass of sacra, but realised he didn’t really want it. He offered
it to Rawne, who shook his head, and then to Dorden, who took it and sipped it. The Tanith chief medic sat near the
central fire pit. Gaunt had never seen him look so old or so tired.
“Tell him, Colm,” Dorden said. “Tell him, damn it. I didn’t believe you at first either, remember?”
“No, you didn’t.” Colm sipped his broth, put it down, and pulled a box of cigars from his hip pouch. He offered
them around.
“If I may,” said ayatani Zweil, rising up from his floor mat to take one. With a surprised grin, Corbec lit it for him.
“Haven’t had one for years,” smiled Zweil, enjoying the first few puffs. “What’s the worst it could do? Kill me?”
“Least of your worries now, father,” said Rawne.
“Too true.”
“I’m waiting, Colm,” said Gaunt.
“I… ah… let me see… how best to put it… I… well, the thing of it was… at first…”
“The saint spoke to him,” said Dorden abruptly.
Zweil exploded in a coughing fit. Corbec leaned forward to thump the old priest on the back.
“Corbec?” growled Gaunt.
“Well, she did, didn’t she?” said Dorden. He turned to Gaunt and Rawne. “Don’t look at me like that either of you.
I know how mad it sounds. That’s how I felt when Colm told it to me. But answer me this… What in the name of the
good God-Emperor would make an old man like me come all this way too? Eh? It almost killed me. The fething
Ladder of Heaven! It nearly killed all of us. But none of us are mad. None of us. Not even Colm.”
“Oh, thanks for that,” said Corbec.
“I need more,” began Gaunt.
“A whole fething lot more,” agreed Rawne, helping himself to a stiff drink after all.
“I had these dreams. About my old dad. Back on Tanith, Pryze County,” said Corbec.
“Aha. Here we go…” said Rawne.
“Get out if you don’t want to listen!” spat Dorden. Rawne shrugged and sat. The mild old medic had never spoken
to him like that before.
“He was trying to tell me something,” Corbec went on. “This was right after I’d been through the clutches of that
Pater Sin.”
“Trauma, then?” suggested Gaunt.
“Oh, very probably. If it makes it easier for you, we can pretend I slogged three hundred fething kilometres just
because I wanted to be with you at the last stand of the Ghosts. And these people were fool enough to follow me.”
“That is easier to pretend,” said Rawne.
“Agreed, major,” said Gaunt. “But humour us, Corbec, and tell us the rest.”
“Through my father, in my dreams, the saint called me. I can’t prove it, but it’s a fact. She called me. I didn’t know
what to do. I thought I was cracking up. Then I discovered Daur felt the same way. From the moment he was injured,
he’d been taken by this niggle, this itch that wouldn’t go away, no matter how hard he tried to scratch it.”
“Captain?” asked Gaunt. Daur sat over in the corner and so far he’d said nothing. The cold and fatigue of his hard
journey had played hell with his wound-weakened state.
“It’s as the colonel describes. I had a… a feeling.”
“Right,” said Gaunt. He turned back to Corbec. “And then what? This feeling was so strong you and Daur broke
orders, deserted, and took the others with you?”
“About that,” admitted Corbec.
“Breaking orders… Where have I heard that recently?” murmured Zweil, relighting his cigar. “Shut up, father,”
said Gaunt.
“Corbec told me what was going on,” said Dorden quietly. “He told me what was in his head and what he planned
to do. I knew he was trying to rope in able-bodied troopers to go with him. I tried to argue him out of it. But…”
“But?”
“But by then the saint had spoken to me too.”
“Feth me!” Rawne exclaimed.
“She’d spoken to you too, Tolin?” asked Gaunt steadily.
Dorden nodded. “I know how it sounds. But I’d been having these dreams. About my son, Mikal.”
“That’s understandable, doctor. That was a terrible loss for the Ghosts and for you.”
“Thank you, sir. But the more Corbec talked to me about his own dreams, the more I realised they were like mine.
His dead father. My dead son. Coming to each of us with a message. Captain Daur was the same, but in a different
way. Someone… something… was trying to communicate with us.”
“And so the three of you deserted?”
“Yes sir,” said Daur.
“I’m sorry about that, sir,” said Corbec.
Gaunt breathed deeply in contemplation. “And the others? Were they spoken to?”
“Not as far as I know,” said Corbec. “We just recruited them. Milo had come back with the wounded and
desperately wanted to rejoin the company, so he was easy to convince. He brought in the girl, Sanian, her name is.
She’s esholi. We knew we needed local knowledge. But for her guidance we’d have been dead many times over by
now. Shot, or frozen on the mountainside.”
“She found our way for us,” joked Dorden darkly. “I pray to the Golden Throne she finds her own now.”
“Bragg, well, you know Try Again. He’d do any damn thing I tell him,” said Corbec. “He was so eager to help.
Derin, too. Vamberfeld, Nessa. When you’ve got a colonel, a captain and a chief medic asking you to break the rules
and help them out life or death, I think you go for it. None of them are to blame. None should be punished. They gave
their all. For you, really.”
“For me?” asked Gaunt.
“That’s why they were doing it. We’d convinced them it was a life or death mission above and beyond orders.
That you’d have approved. That you’d have wanted it. That it was for the good of the Ghosts and for the Imperium.”
“You say you had to convince them, Corbec,” said Rawne. “That implies you had to lie.”
“None of us lied, major,” said Dorden bluntly. “We knew what we had to do and we told them about it. They
followed, because they’re loyal Ghosts.”
“What about the Pardus… Sergeant Greer is it?”
“We needed a driver, sir,” Daur said. “I’d met Greer a little while before. He didn’t need much convincing.”
“You told him about the saint and her messages?”
“Yes, sir. He didn’t believe them, obviously.”
“Obviously,” echoed Rawne.
“So I…” Daur faltered, ashamed. “I told him we were deserting to go and liberate a trove of ayatani gold from the
Sacred Hills. Then he went along willingly, just like that.” Daur clicked his fingers.
“At last!” said Rawne, refilling his shot glass. “A motivation I can believe.”
“Is there a trove of ayatani gold in the Sacred Hills?” Zweil asked, blowing casual but perfect smoke rings.
“I don’t believe so, father,” said Daur miserably.
“Oh good. I’d hate to be the last to know.”
Gaunt sat down on a stool by the door, ruminated, and stood up again almost at once. Corbec could tell he was
nervous, edgy.
“I’m sorry, Ibram…” he began.
Gaunt held up a commanding hand. “Save it, Colm. Tell me this… If I believe this miraculous story one
millimetre… What happens now? What are you all here for?”
Corbec looked at Dorden, who shrugged. Daur put his head in his hands.
“That’s where we all kind of run out of credibility, sir,” said Corbec.
“That’s where it happens?” Rawne chuckled. “Excuse me, Gaunt, but I thought that moment had passed long ago!”
“Perhaps, major. So… none of you have any idea what you’re supposed to do now you’re here?”
“No, sir,” said Daur.
“Not a clue,” said Corbec.
“I’m sorry,” said Dorden.
“Very well,” said Gaunt. “You should return to the billets arranged for you and get some sleep.”
The three members of the Wounded Wagon party nodded and began to get up.
“Oh no, no, no!” said Zweil suddenly. “That’s not an end to it! Not at all!”
“Father,” Gaunt began. “It’s late and we’re all going to die in the morning. Let it go.”
“I won’t,” said Zweil. He stubbed out his cigar butt in a saucer. “A good smoke, colonel. Thank you. Now sit
down and tell me more.”
“This isn’t the time, father,” said Gaunt.
“It is the time. If this isn’t the time, I don’t bloody know what is! The saint spoke to these men, and sent them out
after us on a holy cause!”
“Please,” said Rawne sourly.
“A holy cause! Like it or not, believe it or not, these men are Infardi!”
“They’re what?” cried Rawne, reaching for his laspistol as he leapt up.
“Infardi! Infardi! What’s your word for it…? Pilgrims! They’re bloody pilgrims! They have come all this way in
the name of the hallowed beati! Don’t spurn them now!”
“Sit down, Rawne, and put the sidearm away. What do you suggest we do, Father Zweil?”
“Ask them the obvious question, colonel-commissar.”
“Which is?”
“What did the saint say to them?”
Gaunt ran his splayed hands back though his cropped blond hair. His left arm throbbed. “Fine. For the record…
What did the saint say to you?”
“Sabbat Martyr,” Dorden, Corbec and Daur replied in unison.
Gaunt sat down sharply.
“Oh sacred feth,” he murmured.
“Sir?” queried Rawne, getting up. “What does that mean?”
“That means she’s probably been speaking to me too.”
“Sanian?” Milo called her name as he edged down the dim corridors of the Shrinehold.
The wind outside wailed down the flues of the airshafts. Bizarre reflections of light from the warp storm outside
spilled across the tiled floor from the casements. He saw a figure sitting on one of the hallway benches.
“Sanian?”
“Hello, Milo.”
“What are you doing?”
He could see what she was doing. Clumsily and inexpertly, she was field-stripping and loading an Imperial
lasrifle.
She looked around at him as he approached, put down the chamber block and the dirty vizzy-cloth, and kissed him
impetuously on the cheek. Her fingers left a smudge of oil on his chin.
“What was that for?”
“For helping me.”
“Helping you to do what?”
She didn’t reply immediately. She was trying to screw in the rifle’s barrel the wrong way.
“Let me,” said Milo, reaching around her to grip the weapon. “So what have I helped you to do?”
She watched as his expert hands locked the rifle system together.
“Praise you to the saint Brin. Praise you.”
“Why? What have I done?” he asked as she took the weapon from his hands.
“You,” she smiled. “You and your Ghosts. From them, I have found my way. I am esholi no longer. I see the future.
I see my way at last.”
“Your way? So… what is it?”
Outside, the warp storm blistered across the night sky. “It’s the only way there is,” she said.
“I’m sorry, but this is crazy!” Rawne cried, hurrying to catch up with Gaunt, Dorden, Corbec, Zweil and Daur as they
strode down the long cloisters of the Shrinehold heading for the holy sepulchre.
“What is this commotion?” asked an ayatani, coming out of a pair of inner doors.
“Go back to bed,” Zweil told him as they rushed past.
Gaunt stopped dead and they slammed into him from behind.
He turned around. “Rawne’s right! This is fething stupid! There’s nothing in it!”
“You said yourself some voice has murmured ‘Sabbat Martyr’ to you several times,” reminded Dorden.
“It did! I thought it did! Feth! This is madness!”
“How long have we been thinking that?” Dorden looked aside at Corbec.
“It doesn’t matter how stupid it feels,” Zweil said. “Get in there. Into the sepulchre! Test it!”
“I’ve already been there! You know that!” said Gaunt.
“On your own, maybe. Not with these other Infardi.”
“I wish you’d stop using that word,” said Rawne.
“And I wish you’d bugger off,” Zweil told him.
“Stop it! All of you!” cried Gaunt. “Let’s just go and see what happens…”
“Vambs?” whispered Bragg, pushing open the heavy, red door of the sepulchre. He wasn’t sure where he was, but it
looked a feth of a lot like a place he shouldn’t be.
The chamber was dark, the air was smoky and the floor was squeaky. Bragg edged across the shiny tiles carefully.
They looked valuable. Too valuable for his big boots. “Vambs? Mate?”
Scary holos of Space Marines loomed out of alcoves in the black walls.
“For feth’s sake! Vambs?”
Behind the polished altar and under a big hood of what looked to Bragg like bone, he saw Vamberfeld, bending
over a small hardwood casket in the shadows.
“Vambs?” Bragg approached the altar. “What are you doing in here?”
“Look, Bragg!” Vamberfeld held up an object he had taken from the casket. “It’s her jiddi-stick! The cane used by
Sabbat herself to drive her chelon to market.”
“Great. Uhm… I reckon you oughta put that back…” Bragg said.
“Should I? Maybe. Anyway, look at this, Bragg! Remember that broken crook I found? See? It matches exactly the
broken haft they have here! Can you believe it? Exactly! I think I found a piece of the saint’s actual crook!”
“I think I should get you to the doc, mate,” Bragg said carefully. “We shouldn’t be in here.”
“I think we should. I think I should.”
The sepulchre door creaked open behind them.
“Feth! Someone’s coming in,” said Bragg, worried. “Stay here. Don’t touch anything else, okay? Not a thing.” He
walked back into the main area of the sepulchre.
“What the feth are you doing here?” Vamberfeld heard Bragg ask a few seconds later.
He turned and stared out of the gloomy reliquary. His friend Bragg was talking to someone.
“Same as you, Tanith. I’ve come for the gold.”
“The gold? What fething gold?” Vamberfeld heard Bragg reply.
“Don’t screw with me, big guy!” the other voice said.
“I have no intention of screwing with you. Put that auto down, Greer. It’s not funny anymore.”
Don’t. Not in here, Vamberfeld thought. Please not in here. His hand was starting to shake.
He got up and came out of the reliquary. Greer was standing inside the big red door, which he’d closed behind
him. He looked sick and desperate and twitchy. His skin was haggard and blotchy from the ordeal they’d all been
through. He was pointing a guard-issue autopistol at Bragg.
The moment Vamberfeld appeared, Greer flicked the muzzle to cover him as well.
“Two of you, huh? I expected as much, that’s why I came down here. Trying to cheat me out of my cut, huh? Did
Daur put you up to this or are you stabbing him in the back too?”
“What the good feth are you talking about?” asked Bragg.
“The gold! The damn gold! Stop playing innocent!”
“There is no gold,” said Vamberfeld, trying to stop his hand shaking. “I told you that.”
“Shut up! You’re not right in the head, you psycho! You’ve got nothing I wanna hear!”
“Why don’t you put the gun down, Greer?” asked Bragg, taking a step forward. The gun switched back to cover
him.
“Don’t move. Don’t try that crap. Show me the gold! Now! You got here before me, you must’ve found it!”
“There is no gold,” Vamberfeld repeated.
“Shut the hell up!” spat Greer, swinging the gun back to cover the Verghastite.
“This is getting out of hand,” said Bragg. “We gotta calm down…”
“Okay, okay,” Greer seemed to agree. “Look, we’ll split it three ways. Gold’s heavy. I can’t carry it all, and
there’s no way I’m staying here tonight. Chaos is going to be all over this shithole any rime. Three way split. As
much as we can take. You help me carry it back down the Ladder to the Chimera. What do you say?”
“I’d say… One, you know we’d never make it back all that way, especially laden down… Two, the whole
planet’s falling to Chaos, so there’s nowhere to run to… And three, there is no fething gold.”
“Screw you, then! I’ll take what I can myself! As much gold as I can carry!”
“There is no gold,” said Vamberfeld.
“Shut up, you head-job!” screamed Greer, aiming the gun at Vamberfeld. “Make him shut up, Tanith! Make him
stop saying that!”
“But it’s true,” said Vamberfeld. His hand was shaking so much. So hard. Trying to make it stop, he pushed it into
his pocket.
“What the hell? Are you going for a weapon?” Greer aimed the gun straight-armed at Vamberfeld, his finger
squeezing.
“No!” Bragg lunged at Greer, grappling frantically at his weapon.
The pistol discharged. The round hit Vamberfeld in the chest and threw him over onto his back.
“Vambs!” Bragg raged in horror. “God-Emperor feth you, you bastard!” His massive left fist crashed into Greer’s
face, hurling the Pardus back across the sepulchre with blood spurting from his broken nose and teeth. The gun fired
again twice, sending one bullet through Bragg’s right thigh and the other explosively through the front of the chelonshell
altar in a spray of lustrous shards.
Bragg lunged at Greer again, big hands clawing.
The Pardus sergeant’s first shot didn’t even slow Bragg down, even though it went right through his torso. Neither
did the second. The third finally brought Bragg down, hard on his face, at Greer’s feet.
“You stupid pair of bastards!” Greer snarled contemptuously at the fallen men, trying to staunch the blood pouring
out of his smashed face.
The Verghastite lay on the floor beside Bragg, face up, staring at the roof shadows high above through sightless
eyes. Bragg was face down. A wide and spreading lake of blood seeped out across the ancient, precious tiles from
each of them. The Pardus sergeant strode in towards the sepulchre.
“What the feth! Did you hear that?” Corbec cried.
“Shooting! From the sepulchre,” said Gaunt. He pulled his bolt pistol out and started to run. The others raced after
him, Dorden lagging, his weary legs too leaden.
They burst into the sepulchre, Gaunt’s boot slamming the massive door wide.
“Oh, feth me, no! Doc!” bellowed Corbec, gazing at the bodies and the blood.
“Who would do this?” Zweil gasped.
“There! Down there!” cried Rawne, his laspistol already drawn.
In the reliquary itself, Greer dived for cover behind the altar. He’d overturned the hardwood relic casket in his
frantic search, spilling the ancient pieces across the floor. The glass covers over the gospel stands were smashed.
The venerated Imperator armour was half-slumped off its palanquin.
“Where is it? Where’s the gold, you bastards?” he screamed, ripping off several shots. Rawne cried out in pain as
he was twisted round off his feet. Gaunt grabbed Zweil and threw himself down on top of the old priest as a shield.
Corbec and Daur ducked hard. Dorden, just reaching the door, sought cover behind the frame.
“Greer! Greer! What the feth are you doing?” bawled Corbec.
“Back off! Back the hell off or I’ll kill you all!” yelled Greer, firing three more shots that punched into the shrine’s
door or chipped the black corundum of the walls.
“Greer!” cried Daur. “It’s me! Daur! What are you doing?”
Several more shots whined over his head.
Daur had his laspistol out. He glanced at Corbec, hunched on the polished tiles next to him.
A meaningful look.
“Greer! You’ll blow everything! You’ll min it for us!”
“Where is it, Daur?” shouted Greer, slamming a new clip into his sidearm’s grip. “It isn’t here!”
“It is! Gak it, Greer! You’re screwing up all the plans!”
“Plans?” murmured Rawne through gritted teeth. Dorden was hastily dragging him back into the cover of the
doorway. The bullet had punched through Rawne’s forearm.
“You weren’t going to do anything until I gave you the word!” Daur yelled, trying to edge forward. Greer fired
again, crazing several six thousand year old shell-tiles.
“Plans change! You Ghosts were gonna ditch me!”
“No! We can still do this! You hear me? You want to? I can show you the gold! Go with me on this!”
“I dunno…”
“Come on!” cried Daur, and leapt upright, turning to point his laspistol at Corbec, Gaunt and the others. “Drop the
guns! Drop them!”
“What?” stammered Gaunt.
“I guess you got us, Daur,” said Corbec, tossing aside his laspistol and staring at Gaunt as hard as he could.
“I got them covered, Greer! Come on! We can ran for it! Come on! I’ll take you to the gold and we can leave these
bastards to die! Greer!”
Greer rose from behind the altar, his gun in his hand. “You know where the gold is?”
Daur turned, his aimed weapon swinging from the sheltering Ghosts to point at Greer.
“There is no gold, you stupid bastard,” he said, and shot Greer between the eyes.
Dorden ran into the room and knelt by the bodies of Bragg and Vamberfeld. “They’re a mess, but I’ve got pulses
on both. Thank the Emperor the maniac wasn’t packing a las. We need medic teams here right now.”
Standing in the doorway, clutching his bloody arm, Rawne spoke into his microbead. “Three, in the sepulchre. I
require medical teams here right now!”
Gaunt got back to his feet, and helped the winded Zweil up.
“Captain Daur, perhaps you’d give me a warning next time you plan to play a bluff that wild. I almost shot you.”
Daur turned to the colonel-commissar and held out his laspistol, butt-first. “I doubt there’ll be a next time. This is
my fault. I led Greer on. I knew he was dangerous, I just didn’t realise how gakking far he’d go.”
“What are you doing, Daur?” asked Gaunt looking at the gun.
“It’s a court-martial offence, sir,” said Daur.
“Oh, at least,” said Corbec, with a wide grin. “Saving the lives of your commanding officers like that.”
“Nice,” Rawne nodded at Daur. “I never realised you were such a devious bastard, captain.”
“We’ll talk about this later, Daur,” said Gaunt, and walked past the altar and Greer’s spread-eagled corpse. He
stared in dismay at Greer’s wanton desecration.
“Just so I’m absolutely sure,” Zweil whispered to Daur. “There really isn’t a trove of ayatani gold here, is there?”
Daur shook his head. “Just you know, checking.”
Gaunt righted the relic casket and began putting the scattered fragments back reverently.
“What’s keeping Lesp?” growled Dorden. He was trying to keep compression on Bragg’s most serious injury. “I
need a medicae kit. Both of them are bleeding out! Colm! Get some pressure there on Vamberfeld’s chest. No, higher.
Keep it tight!”
The sound of running footsteps came from outside. Milo and Sanian burst in through the doorway and stopped
dead.
“I heard shooting,” said Milo, out of breath. “Oh, great God-Emperor! What’s happened? Bragg!”
“Everything’s under control, lad,” said Corbec, his hands drenched in Vamberfeld’s blood. He wasn’t convinced.
In the reliquary, Gaunt seemed almost beside himself with agony as he tried to set things right.
“What was that?” asked Rawne sharply, looking around.
“What was what?” said Corbec.
“That noise. That hum.”
“I didn’t… Oh, yeah. That’s kind of scary.”
“A vibration!” said Rawne. “The whole place is shaking!”
“It must be the Infardi attacking!” said Milo.
“No,” said Zweil with remarkable calm. “I think it must be the Infardi reaching the sepulchre.”
The candles flickered and went out all at once. Pale, undersea light washed through the ancient tomb, green and
cold. The holograms of the Adeptus Astartes dissolved and vanished, and in their place columns of bright white
hololithic light extended from floor to ceiling. The black stone walls sweated and a pattern of previously invisible
geometric blue bars glowed into life out of the stone, all the way around the chamber. Everything shook with the
deep, ultrasonic growl.
“What the feth is happening?” stammered Rawne.
“I can hear…” Daur began.
“So can I,” said Dorden, looking up in wonder. Silent, phantom lights like ball lightning shimmered and circled
above their heads.
“I can hear singing,” said Corbec. “I can hear my old dad singing.” There were tears in his eyes.
In the reliquary, Gaunt slowly rose to his feet and gazed at the bier on which Saint Sabbat lay.
He could smell the sweet, incorruptible fragrance of spices, acestus and islumbine. The body of the saint began to
shine, brighter and brighter, until the white radiance was too bright to stare at.
“Beati…” Gaunt murmured.
The light streaming out from the bier was so fierce, all the humans within had to close their eyes. The last thing
Corbec saw was the faint silhouette of Ibram Gaunt, kneeling before the saint’s bier, framed by the white ferocity of
a star’s heart.
The light died away, and the sepulchre returned to the way it had been before. Blinking, speechless, they gazed
silently at each other.
For the time it had lasted, no more than a few seconds, a calm but inexorable psychic force of monumental power
had penetrated their minds.
“A miracle,” murmured Zweil, sitting down on the floor. “A proper miracle. A transcendant miracle. You all felt
that, didn’t you?”
“Yes,” sobbed Sanian, her face streaming with tears. Dorden nodded.
“Of course we did,” said Corbec quietly. “I don’t know what that was, but I’ve never been so scared in my life,”
said Rawne.
“I’m telling you, Major Rawne. It was a miracle,” said Zweil.
“No,” said Gaunt emerging from the reliquary. “It wasn’t.”
SEVENTEEN
SABBAT’S MARTYR
“There are no miracles. There are only men.”
—Saint Sabbat, epistles
The Ershul’s final assault began at two o’clock on the morning of the seventeenth day. In the silence of a snow-less,
clear night, under the spasming auroras of the warp storm, they committed their entire strength to the attack on the
Shrinehold. Support columns of reinforcements had been pushing up the pass all day and into the night. The Ershul
were legion-strength. Nine thousand devotee-warriors. Five hundred and seventy armoured machines.
Just under two thousand able-bodied Imperial troops defended the Shrinehold, supported by the last four
Conquerors, one Executioner, one Destroyer, and a handful of Chimeras, Salamanders and Hydra batteries. All they
had on their side was the strategic strength of their walled position and the comparative narrowness of the approach
across the promontory.
The staggering power of the Ershul bombardment hammered down onto the Imperial lines. The honour guard did
not fire back. They were so low on ammunition and shells they had to wait to pick their targets. The Ershul host
advanced towards them.
Standing on the inner wall, Gaunt surveyed their approaching doom through his scope. Even by his best estimate,
they would be able to hold out for no more than twenty or thirty minutes.
He turned and looked at Rawne and Hark. Rawne’s arm was thickly bandaged.
“I don’t really think it matters how we fight this now, but I want you both to head down and rally the men for as
long as you can. Do anything you can to buy time.”
The men nodded.
“The Emperor protects,” Gaunt said, shaking them both by the hand.
“We’re not done yet, sir,” said Hark.
“I know, commissar. But remember… sometimes the carniv gets you.”
The officers strode away down the wall steps together.
Walking towards their deaths, Gaunt thought, taking one last look at the major and the commissar. And I should be
there with them.
He turned and hurried back to the sepulchre where the others were waiting.
“A miracle!” ayatani-ayt Cortona was declaring yet again, his principal clerics gathered around him.
“I keep telling you it’s not,” growled Zweil, “and I have it on good authority.”
“You are just imhava! What do you know?” snapped Cortona.
“A feth of a lot more than you, tempelum,” said Zweil.
“You’ve been hanging out with the wrong crowd, picking up filthy language like that,” Corbec said to Zweil.
“Story of my woebegotten life, colonel,” said Zweil.
Gaunt entered the sepulchre and everyone turned to him.
“There is so little time, I have to be brief. This was not a miracle.”
“But we all felt it! Throughout the Shrinehold! The blessed power, singing in our minds!” cried Cortona.
“It was a psychic test pattern. The activation signature of an ancient device that I believe is buried under the
shrine.”
“A what?” asked one of the ayatani.
“The Adeptus Mechanicus constructed this place to house the saint. I believe they laced the entire rock underneath
us with dormant psyker technology the power — and purpose — of which we can only guess at. Was I the only one
who got that from the psychic wave? It seemed quite clear.”
“Technology to do what?” sneered Cortona.
“To protect the beati. In the event of a true catastrophe, like this influx of the warp. To safeguard her final
prophecy.”
“Preposterous! Why did we not know of it then?” asked another Shrinehold priest. “We are her chosen, her sons.”
“Six thousand years is a long time,” said Corbec. “Time enough to forget. Time enough to turn facts into myths.”
“But why now? Why does it manifest now?” asked Cortona.
“Because we came. Her Infardi. Gathered together in her sepulchre, we triggered the mechanism.”
“How?”
“Because our minds responded to the call. Because we came Because through us, the mechanism recognised the
time for awakening had come.”
“That’s nonsense! Blasphemy, even!” cried the ayatani-ayt. “It presumes you soldiers are more holy than the
sacred brotherhood! Why would it wake for you when it has never woken for us?”
“Because you’re not enlightened. Not that way,” said Zweil, drawing a gasp from the priests. “You tend, and keep
vigil, and reread the texts. But you do so out of inherited duty, not belief. These men really believe.” He gestured to
Corbec, Daur and Gaunt.
There was a lot of angry shouting.
“There’s no time to debate this! You hear that? The forces of Chaos are at the gates! We have a chance to use the
technology the saint has left for us. We have barely any time to figure out how.”
“Sanian and I have been studying the holograms, sir,” said Milo. He gestured to the glowing bars of light in the
shrine’s corundum walls, lights that had not yet faded.
“There are depictions of her holy crusade,” said Sanian, tracing certain runes. “The triumphs of Frenghold,
Aeskaria and Harkalon. A mention of her trusted commanders. Here, for instance, the name of Lord Militant
Kiodrus…”
“You’re going to have to cut to the chase,” Gaunt interjected. “We’ve only got a few minutes left.”
Sanian nodded. “The activation mechanism for the technology appears to be here.” She pointed to a small runic
chart glowing on the wall. “The pillar of the eternal flame, at the very tip of the promontory.”
“How are we to use it?”
“Something must be put in place,” said Sanian, frowning. “Some trigger-icon. I’m not sure what this pictogram
represents.”
“I am,” said Daur. He rose from his stool and took the silver trinket from his pocket. “I think this is what we
need.”
“You seem remarkably sure, Ban,” said Gaunt.
“I’ve never been so sure about anything, sir.”
“Right. No more time for talk. Pass me that and I’ll—”
“Sir,” said Daur. “It was given to me. I think I’m supposed to do this.”
Gaunt nodded. “Very well, Ban. But I’m coming with you.”
“Rally! Rally, my brave boys and girls!” Soric yelled above the roar of explosions. Infardi shells had torn the gate
and the front part of the inner wall away. “This is what we were born for! Deny the arch-enemy of mankind! Deny
him now!”
Gaunt, Corbec, Milo, Sanian and Daur approached the back gate of the outer Shrinehold wall. The din of battle
behind them was deafening.
They readied their weapons. Sanian hefted up her lasrifle.
“We’re going to get killed out there,” Milo told her. “Are you sure you want to do this?”
“My way, remember? War. War is the only true way and I have found it.”
“For Sabbat!” cried Gaunt and threw open the gate.
“Power batteries have failed!” Pauk’s gunner told him.
“Restart them! Restart them!” the lieutenant shouted.
“The couplings have burnt out! We’ve put too much stress on them!”
“Hell, there’s got to be a way to—” Pauk began. He never finished his sentence. Usurper shells atomised the old
Executioner tank Strife.
“Pull the line back! Feygor, pull the line back!” Rawne yelled. The Ershul or whatever their fething name was
were all over their positions now.
The pillar seemed a hundred kilometres away across the snow, gleaming at the very end of the jagged promontory.
Gaunt and his party ran forward in the snow, las-fire from the circling enemy flank zapping over and between them.
“Come on!” Gaunt yelled, firing his bolt pistol at the green-clad Ershul storming forward to cut them off.
“No! No!” Corbec yelped as a las-round hit his leg and brought him down.
Sanian turned and fired her gun on full auto, ripping into the enemy. She wasn’t used to the recoil and it threw her
over into the snow.
“Sanian! Sanian!” Milo stopped to pull her up as Gaunt and Daur ran on. “Come on! I’ll get you back to the—”
The butt of her gun hit Milo in the side of the head and he fell over unconscious.
“Bless you, Milo, but you won’t rob me of this,” she muttered. “This is my way. I’m going to take it, in the name of
the saint. Don’t try to stop me. Forgive me.”
She ran after the others, leaving Milo curled in the snow.
Twenty metres ahead of her, Daur was hit. He fell sideways into the snow, screaming in anger.
Gaunt stopped and ran back to him. The wound was in his side. He was yelling. There was no way he was going
to be able to carry on.
“Ban! Give me the trigger-icon! Ban!” Daur held the silver trinket out, clasped in his bloody fingers.
“Whoever does this will die,” he said. “I know.”
“The psychic burst told me that. It needs a sacrifice. A martyr.”
“I know.”
“Sabbat’s martyr.”
“I know, Ban.”
“The Emperor protects, Ibram.”
“The Emperor protects.” Gaunt took the silver figurine and began to run towards the pillar. Ban Daur tried to rise.
To see. The las-fire of the enemy was too bright.
The thunder of war, of armageddon, shook the walls. Hands bloody, Dorden fought to save Bragg’s life in the
Shrinehold antechamber Lesp had turned into a makeshift infirmary.
“Clamp! Here!”
Lesp obeyed.
It was futile, Dorden knew. Even if he saved Bragg’s life, they were all dead.
“Foskin!” Dorden yelled over as he worked. “How’s Vamberfeld doing?”
“I thought you had him,” said Foskin, jumping up from his work on another of the injured.
“He isn’t here,” said Chayker.
“Where the feth has he gone?” Dorden cried.
Through the prismatic scope of his sight, LeGuin saw Captain Marchese’s P48J blow out in a swirl of sparks.
Barely a second later, the same AT70 that had killed Marchese and his crew put a shell through the side of the
Grey Venger. LeGuin’s layer and loader were both disintegrated. The Destroyer lurched and stopped dead, its
turbines failing for the very last time. Fire swirled through the compartment, up under LeGuin’s feet. His hair was
singed.
He tried the hatch above him. It was jammed shut.
Resignedly, Captain LeGuin sat back in his command chair and waited for the end.
Freezing cold air gusted in around him as the hatch opened.
“Come on! Come on!” Scout Sergeant Mkoll yelled down at him, his arms outstretched. LeGuin looked around
himself for a moment at the rained interior of his beloved tank. “Goodbye,” he said, and then reached up and allowed
Mkoll to pull him out.
Mkoll and LeGuin had got twenty metres from the Grey Venger when it exploded and flattened them both.
Too many! Too many! cried Larkin, firing through his last remaining barrel.
Beside him, a las-shot struck Trooper Cuu in the shoulder and threw him back into the bloody snow.
“Oh, feth! Too many!” Larkin murmured.
“No, Tanith,” smiled Banda beside him as she fired again and again. “Not nearly enough.”
“Think I win my wager,” croaked Cuu, staring up at the warp storm that blistered overhead. “Sure as sure.”
Gaunt was just thirty metres from the pillar, running through the blitz of shots. Infardi were closing all around him.
He didn’t feel the las-round hit his shin, but his leg went dead and he fell, tumbling over and over in the drifts.
“No,” he cried out. “No, please…”
A figure bent over him. It was Sanian, her lasrifle trained on the advancing enemy. She sprayed off a burst and then
turned to Gaunt.
“I’ll take it. Let me.”
Gaunt knew he couldn’t move unaided. “Just help me up, girl. I can make it.”
“Give it to me! I can move faster alone! It’s what she wants!”
Hesitating, Gaunt reached out his hand, the trigger-icon in it.
“Do it right, girl,” he said through pain-gritted teeth. She took the silver icon. “Don’t worry, I—”
Fierce las-fire exploded in the snow around them. Three Ershul troopers were just a few metres away.
Sanian turned to fire, the unfamiliar lasrifle awkward in her hands.
The closest Ershul aimed his weapon to kill her. She threw herself down in desperation.
Pin-point las-fire toppled her would-be killer and the two Ershul behind him.
Spraying las-shots into the face of the enemy, Milo ran to them both, blood streaming from his head.
“Good work Milo,” said Gaunt, straggling for breath and rising on his elbow to fire his bolt pistol.
“The icon! Where is it?” Milo called, looking around. “I can make it! It’s not far! Where the feth is it?”
“It was here! I had it in my hand!” Sanian replied, groping about in the snow as blisteringly intense shots fell
around them.
“Where is it? Oh, God-Emperor! Where the hell is it?”
Major Kleopas was smiling. He didn’t need his augmetic implant to see it. The view through the scope was clear.
The last round fired from the Heart of Destruction had destroyed a Reaver in a bloom of fire.
But it was the last round. The last round ever.
His valiant crew was dead. Flames filled his turret basket, igniting his clothes. He couldn’t move to escape.
Shrapnel had destroyed his legs and severed his spine.
“Damn. You. All. To. Hell,” he gasped out word byword, as the inferno surged up around him and consumed him.
The Ghosts around him were falling back in panic in the face of the overwhelming host.
“There’s nowhere to ran to,” mumbled Commissar Hark, firing at the foe. Blood from a head wound was running
down his cheek and he’d lost his cap.
An Ershul officer, another swirling ball of shield energy, loomed ahead of him. He’d killed three of its kind so far.
Hark hoped this was Pater Sin.
“For the saint! For the Ghosts! For Gaunt!” he bellowed at the top of his voice.
He fired his plasma pistol and the shield exploded.
Half-buried in the snow under the enemy onslaught, Sanian cried out, “Oh my lord! Look! Look!”
Returning fire, Gaunt and Milo both looked around.
“Good feth,” Gaunt stammered.
It was cold out there, on the edge of the promontory. From below the lip, howling gorge winds cut like knives.
Overhead, the warp storm blistered the heavens.
The pillar stood just ahead, a massive finger of corundum, fire flaming from the top of it.
Close now.
It was hard going. He’d been hurt badly. Including the chest wound Greer had dealt him, he had seven wounds.
Las-fire from the Ershul had stabbed at him ferociously these last ten metres.
Daur’s silver trinket was clamped tightly in his hands. It had just been lying there, in the snow, as if it was waiting
for him.
A las blast clipped his calf. Eight. Almost there.
He could see her piercing eyes. The little girl, the herder. He could smell the wet stink of the chelons’ nests and
the cold wind of the high pastures.
He could smell the fragrances of acestus and wild islumbine.
Vamberfeld slumped against the cold, hard side of the watch flame pillar. He uncurled his fingers from the silver
trinket and placed it in the recess, just like he had been shown during the miracle.
His hand wasn’t shaking anymore.
That was good.
An Ershul bolter round blew out the back of his head. Vamberfeld fell back into the snow, a sad smile on his face
Nine.
EIGHTEEN
HONOUR GUARD
“Taken at face value, we were clearly mad. Actually, I believe we’re clearly mad most of the rest of the time, so
go fething figure.”
—Colm Corbec, at Hagia
From deep inside its planetary core, obeying ancient instructions, the mechanisms of the saint came alive. Vast
psychic amplifiers woke and broadcast their signal. For just an instant.
An instant enough to send abject fear into the souls of the Chaos spawn infesting the planet.
An instant enough to cremate the minds of Ershul hosts choking up across the promontory.
An instant enough to blow back the warp storm with such force that the advancing fleet was tumbled aside.
An instant enough to show Tolin Dorden his smiling son again, to show Colm Corbec one last glimpse of his
father, to show Ban Daur a final vision of the old woman with the shockingly white hair in the refugee crowd.
To show Trooper Niceg Vamberfeld the hard, penetrating eyes of the chelon herdsgirl in the last moment of his
life.
Outside the Shrinehold, under a cold, blue sky, Ibram Gaunt limped out, and down a churned-up mass of snow and
stone that used to be steps. He was clad in full dress uniform.
The remnants of the convoy waited below.
Beyond them, littered across the snows of the promontory, lay the fused and charred skeletons of nine thousand
Chaos-touched humans and the blackened wrecks of over five hundred war machines.
“Hark?”
Hark stepped up and saluted the colonel-commissar.
“Units present and numbers correct, sir.”
“Very good.” Gaunt paused and looked back along the promontory at the lonely post tomb the tempelum ayatani
had erected in the snow and rock beside the corundum pillar of the eternal watch fire.
Gaunt climbed up into his waiting Salamander.
“Honour guard, mount up!”
“As the commander orders, mount up and make ready!” Hark relayed down the line. Cries came back.
“Column ready to move out, sir,” Hark reported.
Gaunt thought of Slaydo for a moment and the old blood pact. He touched the scar on his palm. Then he took one
last look back at Vamberfeld’s lonely post tomb.
“Honour guard, advance!” he cried, making a sweeping gesture with his hand.
The units began to rumble forward, under a spotless sky of frozen blue, down towards the head of the pass.


A WARHAMMER 40,000 NOVEL
Straight Silver
Gaunt’s Ghosts - 06
Dan Abnett
IT IS THE 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor has sat immobile on the Golden
Throne of Earth. He is the master of mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might of
his inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with power from the Dark Age of Technology. He
is the Carrion Lord of the Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he may never truly
die.
YET EVEN IN his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the
daemon-infested miasma of the warp, the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the
psychic manifestation of the Emperor's will. Vast armies give battle in his name on uncounted worlds. Greatest
amongst his soldiers are the Adeptus Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades in
arms are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the
tech-priests of the Adeptus Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely enough to
hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants - and worse.
TO BE A man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live in the cruellest and most bloody
regime imaginable. These are the tales of those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and understanding, for in the grim dark future
there is only war. There is no peace amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter of
thirsting gods.
“Throughout the first six months of 772.M41, the seventeenth year of the Sabbat Worlds Campaign, the Imperial
Crusade force under Warmaster Macaroth struggled to consolidate the wins it had achieved during the previous
winter and turn them to its best advantage. Supremacy in the vital Cabal system now seemed possible, thanks to the
lines of resource and supply — the so-called ‘victory veins’ — opened up by the successful actions at Gigar,
Aondrift Nova, Tanzina IV, Phantine and the mighty forge world Urdesh. But the infamous fortress world of Morlond
still held out, and reports suggested that Urlock Gaur — who had, it seemed, become overlord of the archenemy
forces since the death of Archon Nadzybar at Balhaut — was massing a renewed counter-attack in the Carcaradon
Cluster. Furthermore, the Imperial Crusade was contesting hard along its coreward flank with Chaos hosts
commanded by Anakwanar Sek, Shebol Red-hand and Enok Innokenti, three of Gaur’s most capable warlords.
“With typically instinctive flair, and against all the advice of his staff chiefs, Macaroth divided the Crusade force
between his most trusted generals. Crusade Ninth Army, under Lord Militant Humel, was sent to Enothis to break the
grip of Sek’s vile host. The Eighth and Sixth Armies, commanded by General Kelso and Chapter Master Veegum of
the Silver Guard, was directed to the Khan Group to prosecute Innokenti, while the Seventh, under Marshal
Blackwood, struck out deep to coreward, towards Belshiir Binary and Alpha Madrigo. Lord General Bulledin, in
command of the Second, was charged with holding and protecting the spinward supply lines through to Urdesh.
Macaroth himself pressed on with the First, Third and Fourth to lead the renewed push for Morlond and, as the
Warmaster put it, ‘grapple with Gaur in his own backyard’.
“Many voices were raised in objection. The Navy commanders in particular believed that Macaroth had only
survived his gamble at Cabal by the thinnest of luck, and now saw him repeating the risk on an even greater scale.
Other generals expressed unhappiness at being passed over for army command. Van Voytz had hoped to get charge of
the Fifth Army, but that was given to Luscheim and tasked with rearguarding Macaroth’s push. Instead, Van Voytz was
given a brigade-strength taskforce, nominally attached to the Fifth, and sent to Aexe Cardinal, an Imperial world that
had held out throughout the Chaos domination of the Sabbat Worlds. There, he faced the unenviable labour of
breaking a deadlocked land war that had been raging for forty years…”
— from A History of the Later Imperial Crusades
PROLOGUE
“There are three things an Aexegarian may be trusted to do well: make love, make war, and worship the Emperor. Of
these, warmaking is our finest skill. We have been doing it for years. I think you’ll find we have the hang of it.”
— Leonid Fep Krefuel, High Sezar of Aexegary
Brunsgatte towered around him like a badly-ordered dream. He was weary from the long train journey and, as he had
moved westward, the weather had become increasingly poor and wet, so now the pin in his femur ached
rheumatically. He had tried to distract himself by reviewing the despatches once again, but it was too dark in the
back of the limousine. Instead, he sat back, hands clasped across his belly, and watched the city as it passed.
Dusk was closing, and the lamps along the strasseways were beginning to glow amber under their frosted-glass
hoods. In twenty minutes, they would be little stars of pearl-white light. The rain was coming down. To the south, it
made dark, blurry sheets under the clouds that frothed above the commercial district and the Brunsgatte docks.
The limousine, shiny black like a dress uniform shoe, was an old Ampara Furioso Vitesse, as solidly built as a
Leman Russ. On either side of the silver leaping-behj ornament above the car’s snarling chrome grille, a pennant
fluttered. The blue and gold state flag to the left; the gold, white and magenta colours of the Aexe Alliance to the
right. He could barely hear the eight litre engine, such was the thickness of the bodywork and the upholstery, but the
stroking windshield wipers squealed every ten seconds like fingernails down a blackboard.
The car crossed Congressplatz, passed under the shadow of Sezar’s Gate, where slopes of red wreaths were piled
up, and ran the length of the Colonnade of Fishers to Trimercy.
Squeak, squeak, squeak, stroked the wipers.
They stopped at the lights at Trimercy, and the southerly flow of traffic passed before them. The outriders each put
a boot down to steady their bikes. The limousine’s climate control seemed to be circulating nothing but warm exhaust
fumes. He leaned forward and fiddled with the dial, to no appreciable effect.
“What’s wrong with the heater?” he snapped.
The driver lowered the lacquered communicating screen.
“What did you say, sire?”
“The heater.”
“It’s on, sire.”
“Could it be off?”
“Of course, sire.” The driver made an adjustment to the dashboard controls. “Better?”
It wasn’t. He thumbed down the rear door window and let in the cool rain-scents of the city. He could smell damp
tarmac and wet rockcrete. He could hear motor engines and distant horns. At the roadside, by the junction, he could
see a flower stand closing up for the night. The seller, swathed in a transparent slicker, was hand-folding the fractal
blooms into their metal cups. The glittering mathematical petals crackled as deft, expert hands collapsed them.
Some were a particular red. He felt his pulse rate rise. Not now… not now…
He closed his eyes and swallowed hard, trying to retard his breathing the way his physician had taught him. But
the Seiberq Pocket was only a heartbeat away. The lightning. The spraying mud. The dreadnoughts. The pools filling
the shell craters. Red, red…
The lights changed and they pulled north, the outriders describing wide arcs as they roared away ahead, lamps
flashing.
“Are you all right, sire?” the driver asked. “Yes, I’m fine. Fine.” He closed the rear door window to a thin slit.
Mons Sezari rose before them, dominating the skyline, dwarfing even the tallest of Brunsgatte’s steeples and
towers. They climbed the curling road and then pulled in under a glass awning behind the postern gate.
“Ready, sire?” asked the driver.
“Yes,” he said, and got out. A junior military aide held the limousine door for him.
In the days of the great sezars, generals had entered Brunsgatte from the Fortress Gate, carried in pomp on
jewelled warcarts pulled by striding struthids.
Those times were long gone, but protocol demanded that he transferred from the car to a warcart for the final,
formal approach.
A squadron of hussars had the warcart waiting. The struthids, some of the last of that dwindling species, were
huge, proud beasts with massive, polished beaks and thick plumage, standing twenty hands high. He thought of the
scabby, thin mounts the front-line cavalry were forced to make do with.
He stepped up onto the warcart’s backplate, his attaché case tucked under his arm, and the hussar chief lashed the
struthids forward. Their trimmed black claws drew sparks from the wet cobbles as they began to canter.
The fighting birds drew the warcart in under the entry arch of Mons Sezari and drew up at the west porch of the
palace, a long aisle of electric lamps under a stained glass roof. Officers of the Bande Sezari were waiting in full
dress uniform, struthid plumes in their shakos. They wore voluminous pantaloons of green silk, with gold chains
linking the wide hips to their wrists, so that when they saluted, they seemed to spread wide green wings in his
honour.
He dismounted, paid the driver his ritual scuto, and walked up the long blue carpet into the porch. The attaché
case swung in his hand.
Sire Kido Fep Soten, the high sezar’s chamberlain, was waiting for him under the glass portico. Soten parted the
black velvet of his ermine-trimmed robes and made the aquila salute across his chest.
“My sire count, welcome. The sezar awaits you.”
He followed Soten down a long hallway decorated with heraldic motif wallpaper, through a chamber strung with
stupendous chandeliers, and into the audience room. Halberdiers of the Bande Sezari opened the doors for them.
Soten bowed. “My lord high sezar,” he proclaimed, “Count Iaco Bousar Fep Golke, commander-in-chief of the
Aexe Alliance forces, awaits your pleasure.”
The high sezar, Leonid Fep Krefuel, rose from his couch. He had been sitting near the fireplace, shielded from its
direct heat by a fretwork screen. Through open doors on the far side of the room, the count could see a gathering of
figures and hear the clink of glasses.
The sezar was dad in ceremonial gold battledress brocaded with silver wire and diamonds under a behj-skin
mantle. He was a short, heavy-set man with a ruddy, colicky face, a wet, ample mouth and a thin, grey moustache.
“Count Golke, a pleasure as always,” he said.
“My high sezar, you do me an honour.”
“Welcome, welcome… take refreshment.”
A black metal-enhanced servitor whined up alongside them, carrying a tray of drinks. Golke took a small amasec
and sipped it. He owned several estates, including a schloss in the eastern provinces, but still the sheer scale of the
Mons Sezari architecture scared him. The ceilings were so high, the windows so sheer. Blue and gold silk banners,
thirty metres long, hung down the walls, each one sporting the leaping-behj arms of Aexegary. Every month for four
years he had come to the palace to deliver his war report, and still it humbled him.
“I could wait, lord, if you are with guests,” Golke said, gesturing to the figures in the adjacent room.
“No, no. We will join them directly. There are men I want you to meet.”
Golke wanted to ask who the men were, but he could tell the High Sezar of Aexegary was in one of his
businesslike moods. He’d been the same when they’d met the week before the push on Jepel and Seiberq. He’s
preparing to give me instructions he knows I won’t like, Golke thought. God help us, not another Seiberq.
Golke set down his drink. “My report, lord?”
The sezar nodded. “Let’s have it,” he said, settling back onto his place on the couch.
Golke’s fingers were shaking as he unbuckled the attaché case and slid the duplicate copies of the report out. Both
were sleeved in blue covers and closed with gold ribbons. He passed one to his master, who took it and slit the
ribbon with the behj-claw he wore on a signet ring.
Golke opened his own copy, stood before the high sezar and started to read.
“An account of the warfare between the forces of his glorious majesty the High Sezar of Aexegary and his allies,
and the denounced oppressors of Shadik, in the period 181.772 and 212.772. Foremost it must be seen that the
concentration of artillery attacks along the Peinforq Line, and also in the Naeme Valley, has much harassed the
progress of the enemy’s infantry dispositions in that region. Observer estimates place a mortality figure of nine
thousand on said enemy dispositions, with particular losses taken around Bassin-on-Naeme on the nights of 187-189.
Munition expenditure in that period is given as forty-eight thousand nine hundred and eleven 0.12 medium explosive
shells, nine thousand and forty-six 0.90 incendiary shells, two thousand three hundred and seventy-nine 0.50 heavy
shells and—”
“Has the expenditure been costed?” asked the sezar.
“My lord, yes,” said Golke, skipping through the pages of his report. “It is annotated in the fiscal appendix.
Ahm… rounding up, two point two million scutos.”
“You say ‘harassed’ the progress, count. Does that mean impeded? Halted? Denied?”
Golke cleared his throat. “They suffered losses, as I said, and their advance was stalemated, though they retook
the towns of Vilaq and Contae-Sanlur.”
“Move on.”
“My lord. Along the edge of the Meiseq Sector, I am pleased to report our line has held fast despite sequential
attacks. On the afternoon of the 197th, a breakthrough was achieved by the Forty-First Brigade at Sarvo, and they
managed to advance to hold the water mills at Selph.”
“How far is that?”
“Three… ah… three hundred and ten metres, lord.”
“Move on.”
“The north-western sector. At Gibsgatte, the Third Regiment of the Sezari Light held off a counter-push on the
199th. The regimental commander personally notes his gratitude to the high sezar for his foresight in disposing them
to Gibsgatte so that they might achieve such glory.”
“Losses?”
“Twelve hundred and eighty-one, lord.”
The high sezar closed his copy of the report and put it down on the seat beside him.
“Should I continue, sire?” Golke asked.
“Will I hear anything new?” the high sezar asked. “Will I hear anything apart from what is effectively a stalemate
no matter how you dress it up? Will I hear anything apart from deadlock at the cost of thousands of men and millions
of scutos?”
Golke lowered his report to his side. A loose page fell out and fluttered down onto the carpet.
“No, my lord.”
The sezar rose again. “Forty years, count. Forty years of this. Forty years of waste and cost and stagnation. There
are boy soldiers on the front these days whose grandfathers died in the first phases, when we stood against Shadik
alone. Our allies are with us now, thank the Golden Throne, but…”
He looked into the fire for a moment. Golke thought how heavy the behj-skin mantle looked on his shoulders.
“Do you know what Soten told me the other morning?” the sezar asked quietly.
“No, sire.”
“He told me that since the Principality of Fichua added its strength to the Alliance back in… what was it? 764?”
“763, sire, with the Stromberg Pact.”
“Just so. Since 763, our Alliance armies have lost the equivalent of the entire population of Fichua nine times
over.”
It was a stunning statistic. Golke blinked. He knew Fichua well, from vacations there in long-past days. The
smallest country in Continental Aexe, to be sure, but still…
He felt his pulse rising again. Anger rose up in him like quicksilver in a thermometer that has been stuck in a
furnace. He wanted to scream at the lord sezar.
It’s because of you! You! You! You, and the staff chiefs who have gone before me, with your rules of war and your
codes of battle! Damn you and your archaic strategies—
Instead, he bit his tongue and breathed deeply, the way his physician had taught him.
“The impasse is maddening, my lord,” he said. His voice sounded tiny and strained. “But perhaps by the year’s
end, we might—”
The sezar turned to face him. “Count Golke, please. I’m not blaming you for those forty years. I praise your efforts,
the sterling work you have undertaken since you took over as commander-in-chief. I am not a stupid man, no matter
what the popular press says—”
“Of course not, my lord!”
The sezar raised a hand. Firelight winked off the behj-claw ring. “Let them blow off steam, I say. Let them rail in
their editorials and goad me with their cartoons. I am beloved of the Aexegarian people.”
“You are high sezar, my lord.”
“And I will achieve my triumph, I have no doubt. I will break Shadik and drive its hosts out into the wilds.”
“I have no doubt, lord.”
“Neither have I. I never have doubted that, count. But as from tonight, I am assured of it.”
Golke glanced over at the room beyond where the visitors were talking and sipping drinks under the chandeliers.
“Why… tonight, my lord?”
“This day, Count Golke. It will be remembered in our history books. Our great-great-grandchildren will celebrate
it.”
The sezar moved over to Golke and took him gently by the arm. “It has not yet been publicly announced, count, nor
will it be for some time. But you must be told. Five nights ago, Imperial starships arrived in orbit. The first of a
liberation fleet.”
Golke swallowed and considered the words one by one. He felt a hide giddy. The pin in his hip suddenly ached
like a bastard.
“Imperial…?”
“The crusade has reached us, my dear friend. After all these years of fighting alone against Chaos in the dark.
Warmaster Macaroth, praise be his name, has cut a swathe through the archenemy, putting them to flight. The Sabbat
Worlds are his now, his for the taking. And, as is only right, he saw it as his first priority to despatch elite forces to
relieve Aexe Cardinal. The first contingents are deploying as we speak. From next week, the war against Shadik will
be bolstered by the Emperor’s Imperial Guard. Our long struggle has not been in vain.”
“I am… overwhelmed, my lord.”
The sezar grinned. “Take up your drink, Golke, and toast this redemption with me.”
Golke found his glass, and the sezar clinked his own against it.
“To victory, long pursued, rightfully ours.”
They threw their empty glasses into the grate.
“I have something for you, count,” said the sezar. “Two things, actually.” He reached into his robes and produced a
slim, oblong box covered in gold-flecked blue satin. The sezar opened it.
A Gold Aquila, pinned to a white silk ribbon, lay in the cushioned interior. “My lord!”
“This is to acknowledge your devoted service to me, to the Alliance and to Aexegary. The Order of the Eagle. The
greatest honour it is in my gift to bestow.”
The high sezar took the medal from the box and carefully fixed it to Golke’s breast.
“You have done your country great service, Iaco Bousar Fep Golke, and you have acquitted yourself, in my name,
with devotion, ability, obedience and humility. You have personally known the physical cost of war. I salute you.”
“High lord of all, it has been my duty and my duty only.”
The sezar clapped him gently on the arm. “You’ve earned this, Golke. This — and my other gift.”
“Sir?”
“As of midnight tonight, you are honourably relieved of supreme command. Your toil is done.”
“Relieved of command…? My lord, why? Have I displeased you?”
The sezar laughed, loudly. It was forced, Golke could sense.
“Not one bit. But with the arrival of the Imperials, I am forced to make changes in the command structure. Radical
changes. You understand, don’t you, count? It’s all tediously political.”
“My lord?”
“The Imperial general… Vonvoyze, I think he’s called… he’ll want authority, and space to cohere his forces. He
and his senior staff need a liaison, someone who can help to acclimatize them and clasp them into our war effort
efficiently. I trust you, Golke. I want you in that role.”
“Liaison?”
“Just so. Linking our forces with those of our liberators. You have the tact I think. The objectivity. You are an
educated man. And you deserve a rewarding job after the trials of supreme command.”
“I… I consider myself fortunate, my lord. So… who will take my place?”
“As commander-in-chief? I’m giving that to Lyntor-Sewq. He’s all fired up and very much the coming man. He’ll
put a fire under our armies with that enthusiasm of his.”
Golke nodded, though it was just a mechanical gesture. “This Imperial general… he will answer to Lyntor-
Sewq?”
“Of course he will!” the sezar snorted. “The Imperial Guard may have arrived at last to dig us out but this is still
our war. Aexegary will retain supreme command. Come…”
The high sezar put his hand on Count Golke’s arm and steered him towards the cocktail party in the adjacent room.
“Come and meet these Imperial saviours we’ve been sent. Let them get the measure of you. You can congratulate
Lyntor-Sewq while you’re at it.”
“I can’t wait my lord.”
ONE
UP THE LINE TO THE NAEME
“It’s all a matter of ratios.”
—Savil Fep Lyntor-Sewq, Supreme Commander, Aexe Alliance Forces, on reviewing casualty lists
The hulking lift-carriers had dispersed them onto lush green paddocks near a place they had been told was called
Bransgatte. They could see the city skyline in the distance, through leafy woodland and the low-rise roofs of outer
boroughs. Some time that morning it had rained, but now the day was warm and clear and felt like spring.
Everything had come off in the paddocks: infantry, heavy support, munitions, supplies, even the disorderly,
unofficial ranks of camp followers. Processions of big, dirty-sided trucks had begun to lurch onto the grass to gather
them all up and transport them to the railhead. Two kilometres away, over the woodland, the drop-ships of the
Krassian Sixth were visible in the air, gliding down onto their own assembly points.
Trooper Caffran of the Tanith First-and-Only wandered slowly away from the landing zone, where the grass was
bent over by jetwash, and stood by a hedge, overlooking the belt of woods. He sort of liked this place already. There
were trees. There was greenery.
Caffran, first name Dermon, was twenty-four standard years old. He was short but well-made, with a blue dragon
tattooed on his temple. He had been born and bred on Tanith, a forest world that no longer existed. Caffran was an
Imperial Guardsman — a highly effective one, according to his formal record.
He wore the standard issue kit of a Tanith soldier: cross-laced black boots, black fatigue trousers and blouse over
standard issue vest and shorts, with webbing — which supported his field pouches and a plump musette bag — and
lightweight, matt-grey cloth armour. A tight, black buckle-under helmet made of ceramite swung from his waist belt
beside his warknife. On his collars he wore the skull and dagger crest of the Tanith First and around his shoulders
was draped a camo cloak, the signature item of the Tanith regiment, the so-called “Ghosts”.
A heavy pack was slung from his back. His standard pattern Mark III lasrifle, its stock and furniture made of
nalwood, as were all Tanith-stamped lasguns, hung on a fylon sling over his shoulder.
Caffran could smell rain and beech-mast on the air, the wet odours of a woodland floor. Just for a second, the
smell was unbearably evocative. His heart struggled to accommodate the feelings.
He glanced back to see if he was missed, but there already seemed some delay in loading the regiment onto the
trucks. Engines idled and grumbled, and an occasional wheel spun in the muddy grass that the convoy was quickly
chewing up. Local military had pegged out assembly points on the paddock with metal tent stakes and twine, but
seeing the wait, few of the Tanith had stayed in their sections. Some sat on the grass. A few dropped their packs and
started kicking a ball around.
Stewards in long, tan greatcoats hurried about, shouting instructions, directing trucks and trying to gather
guardsmen together as if they were escaped poultry.
At the end of the hedge, Caffran found a brick-paved path that ran away under an avenue of grey-barked trees.
These paddocks were clearly a municipal park, he realised, turned into a makeshift landing zone.
There were benches facing the path, and he sat down on one in damp shade of the avenue trees. It was nice, he
thought. Sure, the trees had none of the grandeur of Tanith trees, but still.
He wondered how Tona was doing. She was his girl, though she was a fellow trooper too. Tona had come in on a
different carrier because they were in different squads now. Sergeant Criid. It still made him chuckle. Another first
for the First-and-Only.
Between every other tree in the avenue, there was a large, smooth cube of white stone. Each had a faded oblong
patch on the side facing the path. Caffran wondered what they were. Markers of some sort, maybe.
He heard someone coming up behind him and turned. It was Commissar Hark, the regiment’s political officer.
Caffran grabbed up his pack hurriedly and stood, but Hark waved him down with a relaxed hand. Sometimes Hark
could be a bastard disciplinarian, but only when it mattered, and it clearly didn’t matter now. He gave the bench a
quick brush with his gloved hand and sat down next to Caffran, curtseying the tails of his stormcoat over his thighs so
he could cross his legs.
“Some kind of general balls-up,” he said, indicating the dispersal area behind them with a sideways nod. “I don’t
know. There’s about twenty trucks packed with our people just sitting there, trying to leave the park. No wonder the
war here’s been going on for forty years. They can’t even organise their way out of a field.”
Caffran smiled.
“Still,” said Hark, “a chance to take the air. You had the right idea.”
“Thought I was about to get a reprimand,” said Caffran.
Hark glanced over at him and raised his eyebrows in a “you never know” expression. Viktor Hark was a sturdy
man, strong but fleshy from years of good living. His eyes were slightly hooded and his clean shaven cheeks slabby.
He took off his commissariate cap and fiddled with the lining, revealing thick, cropped black hair on a skull that rose
like the round tip of bullet from his broad neck.
“They’ve been at it forty years, sir?” Caffran asked.
“Oh, yes,” said Hark, gazing out through the trees at the rise and fall of lift-carriers at another dispersal field in the
middle distance. “Forty fething years. What do you think of that?”
“I’m afraid I don’t know much about it at all, sir. I know this planet is called Aexe Cardinal, and that city over
there is called Brunsgatte. Apart from that…”
“There’ll be briefings, Caffran, don’t worry. You’re a guest of a nation called Aexegary, the chief amongst seven
nation states that are at war with the Republic of Shadik. The brigade is here to bolster their forces and show Shadik
how war really works.”
Caffran nodded. He didn’t really care much, but it wasn’t often he got to have a conversation with Hark. “We’re
fighting a nation, then, sir?”
“No, we’re fighting the same arch-enemy as ever. Chaos got its filthy claws into Shadik some time back, trying to
use it as a foothold to conquer the entire planet.”
“I guess it’s pretty impressive they’ve held them off so long,” Caffran ventured.
Hark shrugged. They were silent for a moment, then Hark said, “How do you think that girl of yours will do?”
“Criid? I think she’ll do fine, sir.”
“Bit of a gamble, giving a woman squad command, but Gaunt agrees it’s worth it. Besides, we needed a Verghast
to take the reins of Kolea’s unit. You think she can take the pressure?”
“Easily. It’s everyone else I’d worry about. Keeping up with her.”
Hark sniggered and put his cap back on. “My appraisal precisely. Still, it’s going to be interesting. Three new
sergeants to test in the field.”
Criid wasn’t the only trooper to have been promoted into dead men’s boots after the tour on Phantine. A Verghast
called Arcuda had been given charge of Indrimmo’s platoon, and Raglon had been posted to lead Adare’s. Best luck
to all three, Caffran felt. Indrimmo had died at Cirenholm, and Adare had been killed during the penetration raid at
Ouranberg. Kolea, one of the best loved Verghast troopers, wasn’t dead, but a head wound during the final phase of
fighting at Ouranberg had robbed him of memory and identity. He could still function, physically, but Gol Kolea
wasn’t living in Gol Kolea’s body anymore. He was a trooper now, serving under Criid as part of his old squad.
Tragic is what it was.
“I see the old heroes and worthies of Aexegary have gone back to fight the war,” Hark said.
“Sir?”
The commissar pointed at the white stone blocks under the trees. “Those plinths. The statues have been removed.
Even the placards. Recycled. Melted down for the war effort. Whoever used to stand on top of those is probably
shrieking towards the Shadik lines right now as part of a shell case. Aexegary is on its last legs, Caffran. Drained to
the limit. We got here just in time.”
“Sir.”
“I hope,” Hark added. “Maybe they’re already dead, just still twitching. Guess we’ll find out.”
His tone was flippant, but his words made Caffran uneasy. No one wants to get into a fight that’s already lost.
Whistles started to blow up on the field. They looked round and saw things were beginning to move. Stewards
were urging Ghost troops onto the trucks.
“Up and at ’em,” Hark said, rising. He dusted his coat down as Caffran hoisted up his bergen.
“Do me a favour,” Hark said. “Loop back down this path and check there are no stragglers. I’ll hold your transport
for you.”
“Yes, sir.”
As Hark walked back up the grass to the LZ, Caffran went the opposite way down the path, covering the trees and
the line of the hedge. He found Derin and Costin leaning against a vacant plinth smoking lho-sticks.
“Look sharp,” Caffran said. “We’re moving at last.”
Both of them cursed.
“And Hark’s on the prowl.”
Derin and Costin finished their smokes and gathered up their kit. “Coming, Caff?” Derin asked.
“Be there in a sec,” he replied, and continued down the pathway, leaving them to wander back to the assembly
areas.
It all seemed clear. Caffran was about to turn back himself when he spotted a lone figure right down at the edge of
the adjoining paddock, lurking under a small stand of trees.
As he jogged closer, he could see who it was: Larkin.
The regiment’s master sniper was so lost in his own thoughts, he didn’t hear Caffran approach. He seemed to be
listening to the rustle of the breeze through the branches above him. His kit and his bagged long-las were piled up on
the grass beside him.
Caffran slowed his pace to a walk. Larkin had never been the most stable of the Tanith, but he’d become
particularly withdrawn and distant since Bragg’s death.
Everyone had been fond of Try Again Bragg. It was hard not to be. Genial and good-natured, almost gentle, he’d
used his famous size and strength to great effect as a heavy weapons specialist… never mind his terrible aim, which
had earned him the nickname. Bragg had fallen to enemy fire at Ouranberg and everyone missed him. He’d seemed to
be one of the regiment’s permanent features, immovable, like bedrock. His death had robbed them all of something.
Confidence perhaps. Even the most gung-ho Ghosts had stopped believing they would live forever.
Bragg had been Larkin’s closest friend. They’d been a double art, the wiry sniper and the giant gunner, like Clarco
and Clop, the downs in the Imperial mystery plays. Larkin had taken the big man’s death hardest of all, probably,
Caffran guessed, because Larkin hadn’t been there. The sniper had been part of the penetration mission, sent in ahead
of the main force, and by the time he had been picked up and returned to the Ghost’s ranks, Bragg was already dead.
“Larks?” Caffran began.
The knife was there in a blink. Larkin’s Tanith warknife, its straight silver blade thirty centimetres long. It
appeared as fast as one of Varl’s barrack room sleight-of-hand tricks. Caffran saw the blade, and the fear in Larkin’s
eyes.
“Feth!” he said, backing off, his hands raised. “Steady!”
It seemed to take a moment for Larkin to recognise Caffran. He blinked, swallowed, then shook his head and put
the knife away with a hand Caffran could see was shaking.
“Sorry, Caff,” Larkin said. “You made me jump.”
“I did that,” agreed Caffran, raising his eyebrows.
“You okay?” Larkin had turned aside and was gazing away into nothing again.
“Larks?”
“I’m fine. Just thinking.”
“About what?”
“Nothing. You… on your own?”
Caffran looked about. “Yeah. Hark sent me to gather everyone up. We’re rousting out.”
Larkin nodded. He seemed a little more composed. It was often hard to tell with Mad Hlaine Larkin. He picked up
his bergen and rested his sniper weapon over his shoulder.
“You sure you’re okay?” Caffran asked.
“Jumpy. Always get jumpy before a show. Got me an ill feeling about…”
“The Emperor protects,” said Caffran.
Larkin murmured something that Caffran didn’t catch and hooked the little silver aquila he wore round his neck out
so he could kiss it.
“Sometimes,” he said, “I don’t think the Emperor’s even watching.”
At the park gates, the reason for the convoy’s slow departure became evident. The Aexegarian people had come out
to greet the liberators. They thronged around the gates, filling nearby streets, blocking the route with a mass of
cheering bodies, despite the best efforts of the local arbites to control them. From the back of the troop trucks, the
crowd was a sea of waving blue and gold flags, with the odd Imperial crest pennant mixed in. At least three brass
bands were vying for attention. Hab-wives held babies up to the sides of the creeping transports, calling to the
guardsmen to touch them and make them lucky. Local hierarchs in full regalia had come out to bless the off-worlders,
and the district mayor had arrived with a delegation of selectmen. Blue and gold bunting threaded the rockcrete
lampposts, chirring in the breeze. The mayor’s aides cornered the first Tanith officer to emerge from the park, and
dragged him off to be presented to the mayor, who granted him the freedom of the city, strung garlands round his neck
and generally shook his hand off on the assumption that he was in charge. He wasn’t. He was Sergeant Varl of nine
platoon who had just happened to get his men onto a track first. Varl was quite enjoying the attention until he was
asked to address the crowd.
It took over three hours to get the Tanith from their LZ to the railhead. The massive convoy finally shook free of
the crowds and moved off through an industrial suburb of Brunsgatte where long straight avenues of identical redbrick
habitat blocks alternated with guild halls, labourers’ welfare dubs and shabby grey manufactories. It started to
rain along the way, a shower at first and then heavier and heavier until the downpour hid the receding towers of the
city and obscured the great palace overlooking it all.
In the rain, the railhead was a blur of steam. Troop trains, converted from livestock wagons, were lined up in
siding areas, their maroon locomotives panting wet heat and hissing out vapours of sooty fumes. Tractors with fat
bowser tanks watered the boilers, and mechanised chutes fed gleaming floods of coke straight into the tenders.
The air smelled of coal-tar. Whistles shrilled. The Tanith exited the tracks and huddled under dripping temporary
awnings as the local militia moved amongst them, issuing embarkation numbers. Heavy equipment and vehicles were
loaded aboard freight trains with wide conflat wagons. From under the awnings, the Tanith waved and exchanged
cat-calls with the Krassian troops mustering on the far side of the tracks. The regiments had fought together at
Ouranberg. Old friendships — and rivalries — were renewed.
Ditching the military staff car that had brought him from the LZ, Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt strode in through
the steam and the bustle. The liaison officer appointed to him, a Major Nyls Fep Buzzel, scurried to keep up. Buzzel
was a short, plump man who kept his right hand stiffly in the pocket of his green overcoat, and Gaunt presumed him
to be an invalid veteran. As Gaunt understood the circumstances on Aexe Cardinal, all able-bodied men not in
reserved occupations were at the front. The fronts, he corrected himself. This was a global war, with theatres to the
north and west of Aexegary, along the sovereign states of the southern oceans, and in the east.
Buzzel was pleasant enough. He wore an officer’s cap with cockade made from some sort of plumage. The feather
was wilting in the rain. He’d said something about serving with the Bande Sezari, a name he mentioned with pride as
if to suggest it was something special, but Gaunt had never heard of it.
“When do I see data-slates? Tacticals? Charts of disposition?” Gaunt asked as he strode along.
“There will be time, sir!” Buzzel replied, side-stepping a munition cart.
Gaunt stopped and looked at the Aexegarian. “I’m moving my troops to the front line, major. I’d like to have a feel
for that area at least before they get there.”
“We will be breaking the transit to Rhonforq, the allied staff headquarters, sir. Briefing dossiers have been
forwarded there.”
“Are these cattle trucks?” Gaunt asked, banging the side of the nearest wagon.
“Yes, but—” Buzzel began before realising Gaunt was already moving again.
“Sergeant Bray! Secure those tent rolls!” Gaunt called.
“Sir!”
“Obel? Ewler? Which train are you supposed to be on? Look at the dockets, for feth’s sake!”
“Yes sir!”
“Varl? Nice speech. You’re missing a few of your mob. I saw them down past the gangers’ huts, smoking and
dicing.”
“Right on it sir!”
Buzzel watched the colonel-commissar curiously. Apparently, he was quite a war hero, so they said. Tall,
imposing in his black leather stormcoat and commissariate cap, with a face like… like his name. Narrow, sculptural,
noble. Buzzel reflected sourly that he didn’t know what a war hero was meant to look like. Sixteen years of frontline
service and he’d never met one.
He liked Gaunt’s manner. Authoritative, brisk, disciplined, and he still seemed to know every man by name.
“Daur!”
A handsome young Tanith captain rushing past stopped to salute Gaunt.
“You malting any sense of this?”
Captain Daur nodded, producing a data-slate. “I borrowed this from one of the local marshals,” he said. “Makes
more sense than a lot of whistle blowing and shouting.”
“Let me look,” said Gaunt and reviewed the slate.
“Managing all right?” he asked as he read.
“Yes sir. Trying to find Grell’s platoon. They should be aboard C Train already, but they’ve been lost in the mix.”
Gaunt turned and pointed. “I saw them over there, behind the signal gantries, helping to load munition crates from
a stalled tractor.”
“Thank you, sir,” Daur said as he took back the slate and hurried off.
“A car has been prepared for you in Train A,” Buzzel said, but Gaunt wasn’t listening.
“Surgeon Curth? What’s the problem?”
A woman had appeared. She was young and wore a borrowed rain-slicker over her red medicae overalls. A stern
expression gave her appealing, heart-shaped face a hard edge.
“All the regimental medical supplies have gone walkabout, Gaunt,” she said. Buzzel was surprised to hear her use
the colonel-commissar’s surname without the respect of rank.
“Have you looked around?”
“We’ve all looked around. Dorden’s hopping mad.”
Buzzel stepped forward. “If I may, sir… the medical supplies would have been loaded onto Train E along with
consumables. That’s already on its way.”
“There’s your answer. Ana,” said Gaunt. “Aexegarian efficiency is a step ahead of you.”
The woman smiled and disappeared into the melee of hurrying bodies.
Gaunt moved on, jumping down off the rockcrete platform so he could walk down the side of a troop train along
the gravelly sleeper bed. Tanith troops pressed themselves eagerly against the wagon window slits and dangled like
apes out of the doorways, clapping their hands and chanting his name. “Gaunt! Gaunt! Gaunt!”
Gaunt made a mock bow, doffed his cap to them and then stood again, clapping back at them. There were cheers.
“Soric! Mkoll! Haller! Domor! My thanks to your men for that warm support! Are you ready to move?” A chorus
of “Ayes!”
“We’re ready, sir!” called a thickset, older sergeant with one eye.
“Good for you, Soric. Tell your boys to get as comfortable as they can. It’s a six-hour ride.”
“Aye, sir!”
“It’s only four hours to Rhonforq, sir,” whispered Buzzel.
“I know. But if they steel themselves for six, four will seem like nothing. It’s called psychology,” Gaunt whispered
back.
He turned to face the train again. “Sergeant Domor?”
“Sir!” replied a soldier with bulky augmetic optical implants.
“Where’s Milo?”
“Here, sir!”
A lad appeared in the crowded wagon doorway, the youngest Tanith Buzzel had yet seen.
“Milo… pipe us on our way,” Gaunt said. The boy nodded and, after a few moments, a wailing, haunting note rose
up above the frenetic activity. Buzzel recognised the tune: The old Imperial hymn “Behold! The Triumph of Terra”.
Three tracks away, Colm Corbec, colonel and second officer of the Tanith regiment, heard the pipes as he slammed
the wagon’s side-door shut and dropped the latch.
Corbec was an oak of a man, bearded and hairy limbed, with a fighting temper and a playful good humour that
made him beloved of the men.
“Ah, the pipes,” he sighed. “Magnifying the glory of Terra to the heavens in bitter-sweet lament.”
“You talk a lot of old feth sometimes, chief,” said Muril, the sniper in Corbec’s squad, and the other troopers
laughed. Muril was a Verghastite, one of a host of men and women recruited from the city of Vervunhive to bolster
the original Tanith strength. The divided loyalties and cultural differences of the two sides — Tanith and Verghast —
had taken a long time to gel, but now they seemed to be pulling together as one fluid unit and for that Corbec was
grateful. They’d fought well together, mixed well, complemented each other’s strengths, but as far as Corbec was
concerned, the real breakthrough had come when they’d started using each other’s curse words. Once he’d heard
Verghastites saying “Feth!” and Tanith saying “Gak!” he’d known they were home and dry.
Muril was one of his favourite troopers. Like many of the female Verghast volunteers, she’d excelled at
marksmanship and had specialised as a sniper. Her bagged long-las lay beside her on the straw-littered floor of the
wagon and the grey silk marksman’s lanyard was displayed between the third button of her field jacket and the stud
of the left-hand breast pocket. Muril was tall and lean, with long dark hair that she kept pinned back in a bun, and a
slender, sharp-nosed face framing knowing dark eyes and a refreshing smile. Corbec had seen her injured during the
fight for Cirenholm. In fact, he’d almost got himself killed dragging her to safety. Despite the fact the surgeon had
been required to rebuild her pelvis, she had recovered a fething sight quicker than he had.
He was still shaky, still weak, though he put a brave face on it. Several people had commented on how much
weight he had lost. I’m old, Corbec told himself. Recovery takes longer for a man of my distinguished years.
Old in so many ways, he reflected. Sehra Muril was as lovely as any girl he had courted back in his oat-sowing
days in County Pryze, but he appreciated she was quite out of his league now. He knew several young troopers were
competing for her attention. Muril paid Corbec attention all right, but he was rather afraid he knew that look. The
look a girl would give her father.
Mkoll, the regiment’s chief scout had told Corbec that Muril had put in for scout training. If she was successful,
Corbec would lose her, but he didn’t begrudge it Stealth scouts were the Tanith First’s forte, and so far no
Verghastite had made the grade. Mkoll was doing his best to bring some of them up to scratch, and if one of those
was going to be Sehra Muril, Corbec was determined to be nothing but fething proud.
The train lurched and then began to roll. Corbec shot out a hand to steady himself against the wagon’s side.
He pulled his dog-eared tarot pack from his blouse pocket and grinned. “Okay, lads and lasses. Who’s for a game
of Strip Solon Naked?”
Train E pulled out, rattling as it hunted over the multiple points and gained speed.
Major Elim Rawne, third officer of the regiment under Gaunt and Corbec, sat back in the first troop wagon and
accepted a lho-stick from his adjutant, Feygor.
“What do you reckon to this one, major?” Feygor asked.
Feygor was a vicious whip of a man, tall and thin, who had allied himself to Rawne right from the off. Some said
they had a murky history that went back to their days on Tanith. They were alike. Rawne was handsome, in the way
that weapons and snakes are handsome. Slim but well-built, Rawne had a fine profile and eyes that, as Corbec put it,
could charm the drawers off a Sororitas nun. When this comment had filtered back to Rawne, his only remark had
been, “Oh. Do they wear drawers?”
Rawne hated Gaunt. It was that simple. He hated him for a number of things, but foremost he hated him for letting
the Tanith homeworld die. But it was an old hatred, and it had become feeble with neglect. These days, he tolerated
Gaunt. Even so, most of the troops thought Rawne was the nastiest piece of work the Tanith First could offer.
They were wrong.
Murtan Feygor had got his throat shot away during the fight for Vervunhive, and his every word came flat and
monotone through a speech enhancer sewn into his larynx. Since then, he’d sounded permanently sarcastic, though
several Ghosts, Varl and Corbec in particular, had opined that it was no great disability because he always had
anyway. Fierce as a cornered plague-rat, he was snide and cunning and trusted no one except Rawne.
But he wasn’t the nastiest piece of work the Tanith First could offer either.
Rawne exhaled a long bar of blue smoke as he thought about Feygor’s question. “Dug-in war, isn’t it, Murt?
Drawn out, old. It’ll be trenches, you mark my words. Fething field fortifications. We’ll spend our time either
labouring with nine seventies like common navvies or ducking for cover in some other bastard’s latrine.”
“I hear you,” said Feygor with disgust. “Fething trenches. Fething nine-seventies.”
A nine-seventy referred to the Imperial Guard’s standard issue entrenching tool: a heavy, compact multi-purpose
pick that could be stowed by detaching the helve from the head. Its official name was the “Imperial Implement
(General Field Fortification) Pattern 970”. Every Ghost wore one in a button-down leather sheath on the back of his
webbing.
“Trenches,” Rawne muttered blackly. “It’ll be just like Fortis Binary again.”
“Fortis fething Binary,” Feygor echoed.
“Where was that?” Banda whispered to Caffran. They were sitting a little way down the wagon with their backs to
the door, close enough to overhear their platoon commander’s remarks.
“Before your time,” Caffran told her. Jessi Banda was Verghast, another grade one sniper like Muril. Fortis Binary
was a piece of hell the Tanith had endured several years before the fight at Vervunhive had brought the new recruits
in.
“It was a forge world,” Caffran explained. “We were trench-bound for a long time. It was… unpleasant.”
“What happened?” Banda asked.
“We survived,” growled Rawne, listening in.
It was a straight put-down, but Banda just raised her eyebrows and grinned, letting it wash over her. Major Rawne
had never been able to disguise his contempt for the female troopers. He didn’t believe they had any business being
in the Tanith First. Banda had often wondered why. She’d have to ask him sometime.
“Any advice?” she asked.
The boldness of the question floored Rawne for a second, but that was the way of these fething women. He tried to
come up with something good, but “Keep your head down” was all he could manage.
“Fair enough,” she nodded, and settled back.
“You hear that?” Feygor asked suddenly.
“What?” asked Rawne.
“Raised voices. In the next wagon.”
Rawne glowered. “Sort it out, will you?” he said.
“I won’t tell you again,” said Tona Criid.
“So don’t,” replied Lijah Cuu, not even looking at her. Every member of Criid’s platoon, crowded into the wagon
space, had fallen silent and was watching the confrontation warily.
“You will service your kit and field strip your weapon, trooper.” Criid’s voice was firm.
“It’s a waste of time,” Cuu replied.
“You got something better to do?” she asked.
Cuu looked at her for the first time, fixing her with his cold green eyes. “Plenty,” he said.
No one had dared mess with Tona Criid before her promotion. Thin and tough, with cropped bleached hair, Criid
was a ganger from the slums of Vervunhive, an environment that had schooled her wits, reflexes and fighting smarts.
Though young, she could more than look after herself, and was reckoned to be one of the hardest of the female
troopers. Unlike Verghastites such as Banda and Muril, she hadn’t specialised. She was a regular trooper with frontline
experience.
Her promotion to sergeant, and the squad command that went with it, was never going to be an easy ride. Gaunt
had done it on Mark’s advice. Hark believed it would send the right message to all the troopers in the regiment…
take the Verghastites seriously. Take the women seriously.
Certainly ten platoon needed a Verghastite officer now Kolea was incapacitated. He’d commanded almost
automatic respect because of his record as a guerrilla company leader during the hive war. But his squad was tight,
and everyone knew they wouldn’t take kindly to any replacement no matter how qualified. There were some tough
customers in ten platoon, and none tougher than Lijah Cuu.
Cuu was a bad ploin and no mistake. A competent trooper, with abilities that could probably take him into either
sniper or scout speciality, but he had a mean streak as deep and obvious as the scar that split his face from top to
bottom. At Cirenholm, he’d been accused of the brutal rape-murder of a civilian and had come within sniffing
distance of a firing squad before Gaunt had got him off. Innocent of that, perhaps, but guilty of so many other things.
The plain fact was that he liked killing things. You got troopers like that in the Guard sometimes.
Gaunt had considered transferring Cuu out of ten platoon but knew that would undermine Criid’s authority. The
Ghosts would read that as him giving Criid an easy ride. He’d told her she’d have to deal with him.
Criid took Cuu’s gaze without blinking. “Let’s review,” she said, slowly and clearly. “You’re a member of ten
platoon. I’m the squad officer. I’ve just given Ten a direct order to make use of this transit time to service kit and
weapons, and everyone else is happy to do that. Aren’t you? Lubba?”
“Yes, ma’am,” grunted the gang-tattooed flamer bearer.
“Nessa?”
The squad’s sniper, permanently deaf from shell-damage at the hive, signed back “yes”.
“Jajjo? Hwlan? Any problems with my order?”
Jajjo, a mixed-race Verghastite with dark brown skin and darker eyes shrugged and smiled. Ten platoon’s Tanith
scout Hwlan nodded with a brisk, “Yes, m — sarge!”
“Only you seem to have a problem, Cuu.”
“Seems so. Sure as sure.” He smiled. It was the most unset-ding smile in the Imperium. The most evil servants of
Chaos would have killed to have a smile that lethal.
Tona Criid was not smiling. Deep inside, she was trembling. Her greatest fear was not death or torture or grievous
injury. It was failure. Failure to live up to the opportunity Gaunt had given her. She would make this platoon her own.
Or die trying. And die trying, seemed more likely the case.
“Do it now,” she said.
Cuu deliberately dropped his pack and weapon onto the floor and took out a lho-stick, which he lit with a tinder
box. “You know what I hate,” he said, blowing smoke at her. “What I hate is the fact that you talk to me like I was
one of your gakking kids.”
“Oh feth me!” Trooper Vril whispered to Hwlan. “There’s gonna be a fight now.”
“Sure as sure,” Hwlan whispered back sarcastically.
Unless you were going to make nice, you didn’t mention Criid’s kids. Yoncy and Dalin. They weren’t hers
biologically, just war-waifs she’d rescued from the killing grounds at Vervunhive and looked after ever since. She
and her man Caffran were parents to them, and when they were off in action, the two kids were looked after by the
regiment’s camp followers. It was the Tanith First’s one little happy-ending tale. Criid and Caffran, true love, kids
saved from death… you couldn’t make feth like that up.
“What did you say, trooper?” asked Criid.
“Here we go,” murmured Vril.
“Ah feth it,” whispered Hwlan. He slid the haft of his nine seventy out to use as a baton. If it came to fists, he’d get
in on Criid’s side. Cuu was a vicious worm. The scout saw that DaFelbe and Skeen both looked ready to jump in,
and Nessa had got to her feet too.
But if it went off, Hwlan thought would it help to get involved? Would Criid thank them? Probably not. She’d want
to assert her command over Cuu alone, to make the point. Hwlan could feel Vril’s hand on his arm, pulling him
down. Vril clearly thought the same way too.
Cuu picked smoke-weed off his lip. “I said I don’t like it when you talk to me like I was one of your kids. Why?
Did that upset you?”
“Not at all,” said Criid smoothly. “But I notice you haven’t shown respect to my rank since this conversation
began. Would a ‘sergeant’ or a ‘ma’am’ really kill you?”
“Gakked if I’m gonna find out,” Cuu said, winking at the troopers around them.
“Don’ you talk that way,” said a voice from the back of the wagon.
“What?” sneered Cuu.
“Don’ talk that way. Don’ be doin’ that.” It was Kolea. He’d risen, slowly, and was staring at Cuu. There was a
vague animosity in his eyes, but his face was blank. The headwound he’d taken at Ouranberg had made him very
slow and direct. His mouth slurred words.
“Sit down, you dimwit,” said Cuu archly. “Go hunt for your brain. I hear the loxad have it in a little glass trophy
box.”
Lubba, staunchly loyal to Kolea, threw himself at Cuu with a snarl, but Criid blocked him and kicked him down on
his arse.
“Full marks for heart,” she told him. “But I won’t have brawling in this platoon.”
“Yes ma’am,” Lubba said.
“Why you bein’ so bad?” Kolea asked Cuu. He shuffled forward, screwing up his eyes in confusion. “It’s all right,
Gol. You sit down,” Criid said. “Sit down, sarge?”
“Yeah, you go sit down and I’ll deal with this.” Kolea wavered. “You sure, sarge? This… this man here was being
bad.”
Criid knew that Kolea had been struggling to remember Cuu’s name, and had failed. She also knew he only called
her “sarge” because he could see her pins.
“Sit down, Trooper Kolea.”
“Okay.”
Criid looked back at Cuu. “Follow my order and service your kit”
“Or what?”
Criid pushed a hand out towards Cuu’s face, and he dodged back, but it was a ruse. The real sting was Criid’s left
leg, sweeping round at knee height.
Cuu crashed over onto the straw-covered floor, hard. Criid was on him in a heartbeat, one hand gripping his hair
and yanking his head back, one knee in the small of his back.
“Or I exert my authority,” she said.
Cuu responded with a gender-related obscenity. In reply, the base of her hand against the back of his head, she
smashed him nose-first into the decking. There was a crack that made them all wince, and it wasn’t wood.
“You gakking bitch!” Cuu coughed as she yanked his head back again by the hair. Blood was running from his
broken nose.
“You wanna go again, Trooper Cuu?”
“Gakking b-OW!” Another headslam.
“Oooh, that’s gonna smart!” Vril gasped.
“I can keep going until we get to where we’re headed and then hand you off to Gaunt…” said Criid, digging her
knee into his spine and making him cry out, “…or you can service your kit and your weapon and call me by rank.
What do you say, Cuu? What do you gakking say?”
“I’ll service my kit, sergeant!”
“…is the right answer. Get up.”
She got off him and he rolled over, his face dripping with blood. “Off you go, Cuu.”
Cuu got up, and took his pack and lasgun off to the farthest corner of the wagon. The members of the platoon slowhandclapped
and Criid performed a little bow.
“What don’t you do?” she asked.
“Mess with you!” Lubba called out.
“Excellent. Carry on.”
“Everything okay in here?” Feygor called, pushing open the dividing shutter between the wagons. “Just fine,” said
Criid. “What’s wrong with Cuu?” Feygor asked. “Nothing,” she said. “Should he be bleeding like that?”
“Yes.”
Feygor shrugged. “Rawne says keep it down.”
“We are.”
“Okay then,” said Feygor and left.
Criid walked down the rocking wagon and sat herself beside Kolea. “That was nice what you did,” she said.
“What’d I do?” he asked, puzzled. “Never mind,” she sighed.
Gaunt rode the A train. His carriage had once been a coach-class car, but its luxury days were long passed. Even so,
he knew that the worn upholstery of the compartments was a fething sight sweeter than the transit arrangements of his
Ghosts.
He sat in a compartment with Buzzel, Chief Medic Dorden, Hark and the regiment’s chaplain, ayatani Zweil.
Gaunt’s adjutant, Corporal Beltayn, waited at the door.
Zweil and Hark were arguing about something, but Gaunt wasn’t paying attention. He gazed out of the window,
watching the vales and fields and woods and townships of Mittel Aexe flicker past.
Doc Dorden leaned over and tapped Gaunt’s knee. “Credit for them?”
Gaunt smiled at the grey-haired medicae. “Not a lot of anything, to be honest. Just trying to focus.”
“An empty mind is like a pot for Chaos to piss in,” said Zweil. Buzzel looked shocked.
“Just kidding,” said the old priest, chortling into his long, wispy beard. He took out a day pipe and began to stoke
it with weed.
“This is a non-smoking area,” said Buzzel.
“I know that!” snapped Zweil testily, though he clearly didn’t. He got up. “I’m off to bless the poor bastards,” he
announced, and stomped off down the connecting corridor.
“Your chaplain is an… unusual man,” said Buzzel.
“No kidding,” said Hark.
Gaunt returned his gaze to the landscape outside. Low, hilly country broken by stands of trees and small lakes. It
would have been almost picturesque if not for the weather. Rain splashed along the windows of the speeding train.
“We’re heading for Rhonforq, you say?” Dorden asked Buzzel.
“Yes, doctor.”
“Which is the gateway to the Naeme Valley?” Buzzel nodded. “The Naeme roughly demarcates the front line in the
central sector.”
“It’s dug-in?” Hark asked.
“Extensively,” said Buzzel, “and has been for a long time.”
Hark scratched an earlobe. “So the front’s as stagnant as we’ve been told?”
“We make advances,” Buzzel said firmly.
“And so do they,” said Gaunt. “As I understand it, there’s a stretch of territory thirty kilometres wide and a
thousand long that has remained disputed for forty years. That’s one hell of a no-man’s land.”
Buzzel shrugged. “It’s been a hard war.”
“An impasse,” said Hark. “Which we’re going to break. I take it you’ll be using the Tanith to their strength as
stealth infiltrators?”
Buzzel looked confused. “I understood you were front-line troops. That’s where you’re being sent. The front line.”
Hark looked at Dorden and both men sighed. Gaunt beckoned Beltayn through the compartment window. “Sir?”
“Can you patch me a link to the lord general?”
“Fraid not sir. Something’s awry. Vox is down.”
“When we get to Rhonforq, find Mkoll and tell him to move a recon team forward to the line. I want a detailed
intelligence capture before we proceed.”
“Yes, sir!”
Gaunt looked at Buzzel. “My Ghosts will fight to the last: harder, braver and stronger than any soldiers you have
ever seen. But I will not see them wasted in the meatgrinder of a slow trench war. They have skills, and I’ll have
them use those skills.”
Buzzel smiled amiably. “I’m sure the supreme commander understands that, sir,” he said.
The train slowed. Outside, Gaunt saw that the landscape had begun to change. The vegetation looked grey and
sick, and acres of farmland had been rutted down to nothing but spongy brown waste. Stands of woodland had been
felled leaving acres of dead stumps like badly planned cemeteries. They passed at least one team of timbermen
denuding a hillside, their big, blacked-iron logging engine sheeting sparks and woodpulp up into the overcast sky.
The roads were thick with drab motor transport and heavy carts drawn by oxen and hippines.
Towns and villages were scruffy and neglected, windows shuttered and boarded. Some had earthworks or pales
raised around their eastern fringes, one in five had the steel mast of a shield generator rising from its midst. Apart
from the masts and the motor vehicles, there was no other sign of metal in commonplace use.
They passed through one village where bells and horns were sounding. The westerly wind was bringing down not
only rain but also a thin, yellowish smoke. Townsfolk in the street went about their business in canvas masks and
rebreathers.
They clanked on through mercy stations — tent cities raised to cope with the exodus of injured, generated at the
front. By Gaunt’s estimation, they were still over a hundred kilometres from the real front The war was so old, so
chronic, it had spilled back this far.
He could smell it. War has its own smell. Not fyceline, not promethium, not water or mud or blood, not rank soil
or ordure, not even the pungent decay of death itself. All of those scents were in the air.
War had a metallic tang. You could almost isolate it. A mineral smell quite subtracted from the diverse secondary
odours it generated. A smell of steel and hate. Pure, repellent, universal.
Gaunt had smelled it on Balhaut, on Voltemand, on Caligula, Fortis Binary, Bucephalon, Monthax, Verghast, Hagia,
Phantine and all the others. That diamond-tough scent of pure war, lurking behind the sweaty, more obvious perfumes
that decorated human conflict.
This was going to be hard. Aexe Cardinal was going to cost them. It was in the air.
War. Waiting for them. Old and hard and cunning, like a wily, immortal beast ready to pounce.
Ready to kill.
TWO
THE WOUNDED RIVER
“From Bassin to Seronne, the rural valley commends itself to the visitor, and in clement season there are many
rewards to be had: the old parish churches, the cafes and inns, and the undemanding footpaths and bridle ways of the
tranquil riverbanks.”
—Fweber’s Touring Guide to Mittel Aexe, 720th edition
The ground was peppered with ancient, rain-filled shell holes for as far as he could see. A pock-marked surface, like
the cratered plain of some dead moon. The wet soil was greenish grey and the pools were dark emerald or black,
though some were skinned with frothy white scum. Nothing seemed to stand taller than the height of a man’s shoulder.
A few poles and staves jutted from the mud, the occasional scourged remains of a tree, iron hoop-stakes and piquets
and coils of barbed wire.
The sky was leaden and bulging with creased blotches of grey and yellow clouds. To the east, a dark haze of rain
fuzzed the horizon into a filthy smudge.
Mkoll lowered his field scope and spat on the ground. The air was heavy with a dusty, chalky smell that got into
the back of the throat. He could feel the grit abrading his teeth. It was the smell of dead land, of earth that had been
disturbed and pulverised and thrown over so many times that it leaked its powdered essence into the air.
“Well, this is fething lovely,” muttered Bonin sarcastically. Mkoll glanced round at him and nodded. It was
disturbing, this place. Tanith scouts had an unerring sense of direction, but the sheer featureless morass around them
made it feel like they were nowhere at all. All of his men seemed uneasy: the usually cheerful Bonin, Caober from
Gaunt’s own platoon, Hwlan from ten, Baen from Varl’s mob. Even Mkvenner, Corbec’s lean, taciturn scout from
two platoon, normally the model of composed calm, seemed unsettled.
Caober had a small map that Gaunt had given him. He held it up, flicking his index finger against the paper in
frustration. “Sitwale Wood,” he said at last.
“Sitwale Wood?” Hwlan echoed, stressing the second word.
Caober shrugged. “The levelling glories of field artillery,” he said, “beneath which all things are rendered equal.”
There was a track of sorts, rutted and mired. The scout party moved off behind Mkoll, following it north-east.
About a kilometre further on, and the track made a crossroads marked by a temporary sign. “55th/9th rg” pointed one
arm. “916th/88th ac” read another. “R’forq ASHQ & 42nd rg” announced the arm that pointed the way they had
come. The last one, pointing west read “Real Life”.
“Company!” Baen called. There were lights on the track behind them, and the sound of labouring engines. Mkoll
waved his men off the track.
A jolting field truck, smeared in mud, rumbled past turning east. Behind it came a staggering file of artillery
tractors towing 0.12 feldkannone pieces. Aexe Alliance infantry in filthy green greatcoats walked beside the column.
Their heads were covered with canvas bag-hoods with rough-cut slits for eyes and mouths. Most carried metal prybars
or coils of wire matting to free up wheels when they bogged in. The hooded men reminded Bonin of the
scarecrows used on the fruit farms back home in County Cuhulic. No one paid any attention to the Tanith team.
Twenty tractors, thirty, thirty-five, then twelve high-sided haycarts piled with shells that had been jacketed for
protection in wicker sleeves. The carts were drawn by hippine teams, ten to a cart. These beasts were thin and wildeyed,
and stank of disease as they whinneyed and snorted along, every step a struggle.
After the slow carts came infantry, trudging under the weight of full field kit, their heads wrapped up in their dirty
scarves. Mkoll watched an officer step out of file and stand by the signpost waving his troops around in the right
direction.
After a few minutes, the officer turned and walked over to the Tanith. His greatcoat was stiff with mud and when
he pulled the scarf away from his dirty face, Mkoll was shocked to see how young he was.
“Lost?” he began. Then he noticed Mkoll’s rank pins and made a more formal salute.
“No,” said Mkoll, stepping up. “Sergeant Mkoll, Tanith First.”
“You’re from the Imperial expedition?”
“That’s right.”
“Lieutenant Fevrierson, 30th battalion, Genswick Foot.” His accent was tight and clipped. Aexegarian. “It’s a
pleasure to see you. Where is your main force?”
“Moving into reserve,” replied Mkoll. “Our commander’s sent us up to scope the leading edge.”
“Scope the…?”
“Assess the disposition of the forward line,” Mkoll glossed. The young man nodded. It was partly the accent,
Mkoll thought. Mine’s as unfamiliar to him as his is to me. That and the fact that they’re still using old terms. He
reminded himself that this war — this world — had been isolated for a good time.
“We’re moving up to the 55th sector,” said Fevrierson. “You’re welcome to tag along.”
Mkoll nodded his thanks and made a brief hand signal that the lieutenant didn’t catch. Immediately, the five men in
his patrol were at his side. They fell in with the still plodding stream of Alliance infantry.
Fevrierson made light conversation as they walked. He was a little wary of the newcomers. Their kit was very
clean and in good order, apart from the splashes they’d picked up on the day’s hike. The fabric of their uniforms was
of a type he didn’t recognise. It looked comfortable and strong, possibly synthetic. They carried powerful-looking
rifles that didn’t seem to have any sort of ejection ports for spent cartridges. Could they be energy weapons?
Fevrierson had never seen a lasgun close up, and they made him feel ashamed of his long, heavy bolt-action
autorifle. The off-worlders also had tech items like power scopes and ear-bead comm-links. Individual trooper
comm-links! They were truly from another place, like the characters in the demiscuto science-romance digests his
brother used to buy from the newsvendor.
“This a rotation?” Mkoll asked.
“Yah. It used to be a week up and then two in reserve, but it’s alternate on and off now.”
“You and your men have been in billets for a week?”
“Yah.” Mkoll bit back a comment about the filthy state of the locals, but Fevrierson had seen the look.
“There are no washing facilities at Jen-Frow. The billets are poor. No water for laundry.”
Mkoll nodded. “I meant no disrespect.”
“Yah, of course,” said the Aexegarian earnestly.
“You’ll soon be dirty, soon enough,” muttered one of his file. Men around sniggered.
“That’s enough, Herxer!” Fevrierson growled.
“It’s okay,” said Bonin. “We do dirty good. We’ve been in dirty scraps before.”
“Where’s your commanding officer?” Mkoll asked Fevrierson.
“I am the commanding officer,” he said.
A whistle blew from the rear echelon, then a second, then another coming up the file.
Fevrierson took out his own and blew. “Off the road! Off the road!”
Mkoll wondered if it was an attack, though there was no sign of anything and the chilly, wet landscape was
otherwise virtually silent.
They heard hooves. Cavalry was moving up the road at a canter, and the infantry were standing off to let them
through.
The Aexegarians cheered and waved their scarves and gens-filly bonnets as the riders went past. The cavaliers
were dressed in blue and gold coats with bright green sashes and white, bell-top shakos. They sat upright and
haughty, eyes front, saddle-sabres clattering at their hips. Their mounts were gigantic flightless birds with grey
feathers and vast hooked beaks, powering along on massive, blue-fleshed limbs.
“Feth me!” said Hwlan.
The front riders held lances with fluttering bannerols, but the rest carried short-action rifles. None of them seemed
to be holding any sort of reins or bridles.
“Hussars. Carbine-hussars,” said Fevrierson proudly. “A fine sight.”
“What are those bird things?” asked Caober.
“Struthids,” said Fevrierson. He frowned. “You’ve never seen a struthid before?”
“I’ve seen plenty,” said Caober. “And now I’ve seen everything.”
“They don’t have reins,” said Mkoll. “Do they control with their feet?”
“They’re psicavalry,” said Fevrierson. “They need both hands to operate the carbines in a charge, so each man has
a puppeteer, linking him to his steed.”
“An implant? Augmetic?”
“I don’t know those words. A puppeteer’s a little machine. They put them in the men’s heads surgically. The
struthid has one grafted in to match. It creates a brain link and lets the man drive the bird.”
Over sixty hussars galloped past and then the infantry returned to the road. Mkoll saw some of the Aexegarian
troopers retrieving the odd feather from the mud and fixing them to their coat collars.
“Lucky charms,” Fevrierson said.
After another forty-five minutes, Mkoll realised the track was sloping down, though the landscape around remained
spread out in its flat pocked immensity. They were entering the rear portions of the trench network. The horizon had
been clear earlier because everything vital had been sunk and dug in.
The workings were of immense size, some as wide as city streets and ten metres deep. Where they extended
below the water table, duckboards had been laid down and teams of sappers were manning hand-pumped bilges.
Strings of electrical lights ran down the carefully revetted walls and Mkoll could smell the ozone of shield
generators. Armoured vehicles and trucks moved down the working line, and when one appeared, they had to stand
to in lay-bys cut into the trench wall to allow them past. Troops hurried back and forth, some in greens, some in
greys, a few in blues and golds or russets, all locals, all filthy. It was like entering a partially buried city. Some
sections of trench were entirely roofed in with wired flakboard, with lighting hanging from the tunnel roofs.
“This is something,” said Baen to Mkoll. “I expected trenches, but not like this.”
“They’ve had forty years to build it,” said Mkoll.
And they’d built it well. Massive, mainstreet-style reserve trenches, often shored up with rockcrete, off which ran
barrack dugouts to the west and communication and support trenches to the east, towards the front. Running as they
did from sap-heads and deep munition wells, the support trenches were shallower but zig-zagged, or were well
provided with solid traverses to protect the vulnerable links and make them easier to defend compartmentally. To the
east about a kilometre away by Mkoll’s estimation, lay the line of the fire trenches. To the west rearwards, lay
deeper pits accessed by communication trenches laid with narrow-gauge rails.
“The gun-pits,” Fevrierson said. Even the main artillery was dug in subsoil, Mkoll thought The rails were for
shell-carts. A few moments later they had to pause to allow barrows of massive wicker-wrapped shells to be heaved
across the reserve trench and up the supply channels to the gun-pits. Fevrierson checked his watch. “Readying for the
night firing,” he said.
The Genswick Foot halted and stood easy in a firing trench as Fevrierson reported to the sector’s staff
blockhouse. He took Mkoll with him.
The blockhouse was a series of armoured rooms buried deep in the ground off the reserve mainway. It had folding
shutters and gas curtains at the entrance.
Inside, it was warm and damp and busy. There was a chart room, and a vox-annex where a row of signallers
chattered into bulky old-style field sets.
Sheafs of thick vox-line cables ran out along the entrance hall and away through loopholes. Inside the main
entrance, sweating, ruddy-faced runners sat on a bench, waiting to be sent out again.
Mkoll waited at a reinforced door while Fevrierson signed in. From his vantage point, the Tanith could see a
small command room filled with military aides grouped around a low map table. They were all in shabby but
impressive number one uniforms: more blue and gold, more green, some yellow, some grey and some dark red.
Mkoll hadn’t got the hang of the varied insignia or liveries yet. The men in grey tended to be quite dark skinned,
and the few in red were pale and red or blond haired.
Fevrierson was reporting to a sallow-faced general whose green uniform seemed loose and ill-fitting. The man’s
face was drawn. He’s lost weight since that kit was tailored for him, Mkoll thought.
The general talked to Fevrierson for a while, pointing to items on the map-table, and signed an order sheet. Then
Fevrierson said something, and indicated Mkoll.
The general nodded and strode over to where the Tanith scout was waiting. Mkoll snapped a salute that the
general gave back.
“We weren’t expecting you for another two days,” said the general.
“We’re not up in force, sir. My commanding officer ordered me forward in advance to assess the field.”
The general nodded and then surprised Mkoll by making the sign of the aquila across his chest and offering his
hand.
“It’s good to see you anyway and I thank the Throne you’ve come. I’m Hargunten, CoS, 55th region. Welcome to
the Peinforq Line.”
“Sir. Mkoll, Tanith First.”
“What do you need, sergeant?”
“A look at the line and the chance to report back to Rhonforq,” said Mkoll. He produced the papers Gaunt had
drawn up for him, countersigned by Buzzel.
General Hargunten looked them over. “Wait here,” he said. “The Genswick are moving forward to station 143, so
you might as well go with them.”
He moved off to confer with other staff. As Mkoll waited he saw that one of the red-uniformed officers was
looking him up and down. A colonel, by his pins. Mkoll didn’t know the crossed-sabres and heraldic dragon of the
man’s insignia.
“Imperial?” he said after a while, his accent new to Mkoll. Thick, glottal, rich.
“Yes, sir.”
“Come to save us all.”
“Come to fight the arch-enemy, sir.”
The colonel snorted. His skin was very pale and slightly freckled and his side-shaved hair was red-gold. “We can
win this war,” he said. “I have no doubt.”
“Without your help,” he finished.
“Not for me to say, sir.”
The colonel grunted and turned away. Fevrierson returned, with the general.
“Papers in order, sergeant,” Hargunten said, returning them to Mkoll. “Go with the lieutenant here. See your way
around. My compliments to your commander.”
Mkoll tucked the folded papers into his webbing pouch and saluted.
“See the front,” the colonel called out. “See a war like you have never known.”
“I’ve known war, sir,” said Mkoll and, turning, strode out of the blockhouse.
“Schleiq me! I can’t believe you did that!” Fevrierson exclaimed as they came out through the gas curtains into the
damp evening air.
“Do what?”
“Smarted him like that!”
“Who was he?”
“Redjacq!”
“Who?”
Fevrierson blinked at Mkoll as if he was mad. “Redjacq… Redjacq Ankre, of Kottmark?”
“Means nothing.”
“The Kottstadt Wyverns?”
“Really, I don’t know. Kottmark is the neighbouring country, isn’t it?”
“Yah… and the other senior partner in the Alliance. We’d be dead now if the Kottmarkers hadn’t joined the war
twenty years ago.”
“And this Redjacq… he’s something special?”
“Their finest field commander. Leads the Wyverns. Furies, they are. We’re lucky to have them in this sector.”
“I’m sure you are.”
It was getting dark by then. Fevrierson got his infantry moving, and they went up through a series of zig-zagging
communications trenches to the front-line position. There, things were more the way Mkoll had expected. No
electrics, just the occasional promethium lamp or brazier. Dirty fire trenches dug in about three metres deep and
heavily traversed with cross-spars and earth-filled gabions. A firestep made of stone lintels laid up against the base
of the leading wall beneath the breastwork and iron loop holes. Despite the duckboards, the trenches were swilling
with liquid mud and alive with vermin.
Wretched soldiers in blue coats stood down and began to retire in slow, weary lines as the Genswick Foot
relieved them and took their places beneath the parapet.
The sky was clouding over and the light seemed to leak out of it. Thunder rumbled somewhere. The trenches stank.
Mkoll turned to his men. “Caober, Baen, Bonin… up that way. Mkvenner, Hwlan… back the other. Twenty minutes
and back to me. See what you see.”
They moved away, but Mkoll caught Mkvenner’s sleeve and held him back a moment. Unofficially, Mkvenner was
Mkoll’s number two in the scouts, totally dedicated and totally ruthless in a way that Mkoll, for all his reputation,
could never hope to be. Some Tanith said Mkvenner had been trained in the old martial ways of cwlwhl, the fighting
art of the Nalsheen, legendary warriors who had maintained law during Tanith’s troubled feudal days. Mkoll always
quashed those rumours, mainly because they were true and he knew how close Mkvenner guarded his background.
“Keep an eye on Hwlan,” Mkoll told him. “Ten platoon is unsettled right now, with Criid taking over. Make sure
he’s together.”
Mkvenner nodded and made off. Mkoll watched the tall, lithe figure retreating down the busy trench.
Mkoll joined Fevrierson in the command dugout. It was little more than a shed built into the leading edge of the
trench. There was a V-shaped binocular periscope on a tripod stand, and Mkoll took a lookout.
It was his first look at the battleground. In the twilight it was a miserable place, though he was certain it would
look even more miserable by day. Torn earth, incomprehensible wreckage, tall piquet fences of dangling wire. A
kilometre away, the shattered land dipped a little and spread into a wide flood plain of poisoned water and stagnant
pools interspersed with muddy islets and ridge-crests of shell-blown soil.
“A lot of water down there,” he said.
“That’s the river.”
Mkoll looked again. “It’s no river…”
Fevrierson smiled at him. “Oh yah! That’s the beautiful Naeme, proud lifeflow of the borderlands!”
“But it’s just pools and lakes and flooded flats…”
Mkoll’s voice trailed off. He realised a river would look like that if it had been shelled for forty years. The banks,
the environs, even the riverbed itself would have been ripped apart and pummelled into ruins. But the water still
flowed. Where once it had been a proud, major river meandering through meadows and sleepy villages on its long
journey to the sea, it was now cut loose, leaking out across the punished landscape like blood from a wound, its
original form and structure lost to the war.
There was a soft “pop” and the area below them was suddenly bathed in chilly white light. A few seconds more
and other starshell flares burst, glowing, in the sky. Through the scope now, everything looked bleached and cold,
hard shadows shivered as the flares slowly dropped.
“Corpse light,” said Fevrierson, putting on his steel helmet. “Brace yourself,” he said.
“Why?”
“It’s time for war.”
Distantly, a whistle blew. A bull-horn wound up and died again, its moan echoing across the front.
The gun-pits of the Peinforq Line woke up.
The sound and light split the darkness and eclipsed the tremulous glow of the starshells. The earth shook. In the
deep pits and weapon-dens behind the line’s spinal trenches, large calibre howitzers and mortars hurled munitions
up into the gathering dusk. Elevated feldkannone and rocketshargen joined them.
Mkoll looked back at the Alliance lines and watched the thunderous light show. Two kilometres west of him and
for twenty kilometres to north and south, the guns blazed and muzzle-fires strobed and danced. Massive, brilliant
flashes flickered up and down the artillery line, some of them casting weird, momentary shadows from their pits.
Mkoll heard the concussive screech of heavy shells lobbing overhead, the deeper, pneumatic twang of mortars, the
huge crump of bombards. Rockets went up and over, squealing in the air and leaving trails of fire.
He’d never seen a bombardment on this scale before. Not even at Vervunhive.
Mkoll looked east, through the scope. A ragged strip of detonations and flame-storms was creeping across the
ruined land on the far side of the wounded river. He could smell fyceline and iron in the wind, and then the stench of
mud rendered into steam.
Fevrierson seemed content. He sat back and took a tin cup of caffeine from his subaltern.
“Want one?” he asked.
“No,” said Mkoll. The bombardment was shaking his marrow.
“They’ll keep this up for a few hours, then they might signal us to advance.”
“Feth,” said Mkoll.
“You might as well have a cup,” said Fevrierson. “We could be here for a w—”
There was a sudden roar and a Shockwave of heat slammed across the front line from the west. Fevrierson
stumbled to his feet. He stared back at the Aexe lines. A white hot cone of fire licked up from the direction of the
allied artillery positions.
“Not a misfire, surely…” he began.
There was another colossal bang and a flash and this time it knocked them all over Whistles were blowing.
“That’s shellfire,” Mkoll said, getting up. “But they’ve got nothing that—”
A third roar. Then a fourth. Then a dozen heavy impacts along the line to the north-west. Gargantuan fires blazed
into the night.
“Schleiq!” Fevrierson cried. “What the hell is that?”
“Something new?” Mkoll asked.
A runner almost fell into the dugout, dripping with perspiration. “Order to repel!” he gasped. “Repel?” Fevrierson
said.
Mkoll grabbed the scope. Out in the no-man’s land of the Naeme Valley, phantom shapes were advancing towards
them.
“Get your men to stand ready,” he told the young lieutenant. “We’re being assaulted.”
Mkoll hurried out into the fire trench, unslinging his rifle. Men were shouting and running, knocking into each other.
They’d panicked.
“Get them under control or we’re dead,” the Tanith hissed at Fevrierson, who started blowing his whistle. Mkoll
could hear the jangle of field phones and yelled exchanges begging for order confirmation.
He hadn’t planned on this. He’d come for a little observation, not to get caught up in a storm assault.
He adjusted his micro-bead. “Four! This is four! Sound off!”
“Thirty-two!” That was Bonin.
“Twenty-eight, four!” Caober.
“Thirteen. Moving up with sixty,” Mkvenner responded, accounting for Hwlan too.
“Forty-five, sir,” Baen said.
“Four, got you. Close on me, at the dugout. Double time.”
“Thirty-two, I see contacts closing,” Bonin reported.
“Understood. Close on me. Permission granted to go active if you need to.”
More titanic impacts rocked the ground, and the sky to the west was underlit yellow with fire. The enemy’s
massive counter-bombardment had broken the discipline of the Allied barrage. Mkoll felt ultrasonic knocking and
then smelled ozone as shields ignited along the Allied command line. In the semi-darkness, he could see the
translucent white umbrellas of energy flickering over the main reserves. Still more enemy ordnance hammered down,
splashing off the shields in great, deflected air blasts. In one place, a shield fizzled as it was struck and died out.
Mkoll was no artillery expert, but he knew the power and range of the enemy guns must be at least on a par with
Imperial super-siege pieces. The front line, this “Peinforq Line”, had clearly been arranged to permit sustained
artillery actions across ranges of five or six kilometres. The shells coming in had probably travelled more like
fifteen or twenty. Fevrierson’s astonished reaction alone was enough. He’d not seen anything like it. That wasn’t a
good sign.
Mkvenner and Hwlan rejoined Mkoll, as did Bonin a moment later. “They’re right on the parapet, less than thirty
metres,” Bonin said.
“Why the feth aren’t these idiots in place?” Hwlan said.
Fevrierson had got a few men onto the firestep and Mkoll heard the first dull bangs of trench mortars and the
chatter of a machine cannon.
Almost immediately, as if in answer, the top of the trench’s back wall started to take hits. Boards splintered and
scads of earth flew out. Then one of the Genswick privates on the firestep flew backwards into the trench bottom as
if he’d been clubbed in the face.
“Bayonets!” Fevrierson yelled. “Stand by to repel!” The gathering mobs of Allied infantry slotted long, bill-tipped
blades to their rifles.
“They’ve got to do more than repel,” Mkvenner said quietly. “A few grenades or a well-timed push and the
enemy’ll be in the trench. They’ve got to go at them before they make the parapet…”
Mkoll looked round at Fevrierson. “Well? While there’s still time.”
The order was to repel. “Hold and repel…” Fevrierson’s voice trailed off. His eyes were wide and wild in the
gloom.
And then it was too late. Multiple explosions tore through the fire trench on the other side of the nearest traverse.
Grenades. A second later, a stick bomb went over their heads, flung too hard. It landed on the top of the rear wall
and covered them in dirt.
The infantry on the firestep started shooting. Their solid-ammo rifles made boxy, hollow bangs which overlapped
with the clatter of the bolts as they were pulled back and forth. Enemy rounds whipped in low over the lip of the
parapet. Two more men collapsed off the step, one spun right around by the impact.
“Hold to repel! Hold to repel!” Fevrierson was shouting.
Suddenly, a significant chunk of the facing parapet blew in, ripping panel-boards and brushwood revetting out of
the wall and tossing men aside onto the duckboards. The first dements of the enemy wave scrambled down into the
trench through the section their grenades had taken out. They wore khaki coats, brown corduroy breeches and slimeslick
puttees, and dark green steel helmets over dirty woollen toques or chain-mail splinter masks. Most carried
bulky autorifles with ugly saw-edged bayonets, but others had pistols and long-handled wire-cutters. Mkoll saw at
least three who were wearing bulky grenadier waistcoats, the multiple canvas pockets stuffed with ball and stick
bombs.
Spilling in through the breach, the trench raiders turned their guns and fired down the ditch line into the milling
Genswick Foot. Other attackers breasted the parapet and started a rapid-fire enfilade into the heart of the section’s
defence.
There was a thick mob of Alliance men between Mkoll and the raiders, most of them trying to run or find cover.
He could hear the whinnying smack of the enemy bullets thumping into the jostling bodies, punching through worsted
and flannel, through canvas and leather, through flesh. Hit, some men convulsed but were held upright by the press.
Others screamed because they were hit or because they were desperate not to be. One man was yanked up out of the
mob by the force of an enfilading shot to the neck, his body cartwheeling over on top of the others. A ball bomb,
round and black with a fizzing paper fuse, bounced off another man’s shoulder and then blew the front of the
command dugout into the air in a shower of planks.
There was general uproar from the Genswick troopers as they tried to flee from the breach and the crossfire. The
bulk of them were penned in by their own confusion like animals in a slaughterhouse channel. Fevrierson and some
of the men up on the firestep managed to return fire over the heads of the mob, and Mkoll counted at least two raiders
go down. He thrust his way forward against the tide of panicking men.
“Feth this! Turn! Turn and fight! Come on!” he snapped.
Mkvenner and Hwlan got up onto the firestep and opened up sidelong down the trench. The sudden bursts of laser
shots stunned the Genswick boys. Like they’ve never seen lasweapons before, Hwlan thought.
“Get down! Get down!” Mkoll yelled at the men in the trench and as they ducked and cowered, he and Bonin fired
a storm of full auto-shots over their heads in support of the sideswiping fire of Mkvenner and Hwlan.
The raiders fell back under the hail of energy rounds. The front three or four were cut straight down, and fell onto
the men behind them, tripping a few of them. Mkoll waded through the huddled Genswick soldiers in the trench base
and opened up a field of fire on the raiders coming over the broken parapet, punishing their enfilade. He felt a rifle
round thump into his chest armour, and others pass close by into the earthen wall, but he kept firing.
Fevrierson blew his whistle. “Come on! Come on! The Imperials have got them on the turn!” Bolt-action rifles
now began to volley at the intruding force. Bonin drew his lasrifle up to his shoulder and took a swift aim, snapping
a single shot that dropped an enemy grenadier in the middle of the raider group. The ball bomb in his hand exploded
and touched off the contents of his waistcoat. Channelled by the trench, the combined blast surged flame, shrapnel
and broken pieces of duckboard in both directions.
“Go!” Mkoll yelled, storming forward with Bonin. The raided section had been effectively cleared by the blast.
The air was full of soil dust fine like flour, and it was settling across everything, making dark sticky patches where it
mixed with spilled blood. The bodies of raiders, scorched black and twisted, lay across the firestep and the trench
floor. One hung upside down from the parapet wire. Mkoll, Bonin and five of the Genswick Foot rushed the firestep
at the broken section of the trench in time to intercept the next raiding party as it came over the parapet.
There was a savage flurry of point-blank shooting that knocked three of the raiders back out of the trench and one
of the Genswickers off the step. Then it was hand-to-hand, brutal, blind. Mkoll used his rifle butt to deflect a bayonet
that jabbed down at him, and then dubbed the attacker in the kneecap with it. One of the Genswick lads bayoneted an
attacker through the belly and hoisted him up into the air like a labourer pitchforking a straw bale. Bonin, who’d had
time to fix his silver Tanith warknife to his rifle’s bayonet lug, killed one man outright and then slashed the thigh of
another, cracking the man’s head with his lasgun’s butt as he fell. A pistol fired twice in Mkoll’s ear and the Alliance
private next to him screamed and fell, clutching his face. Mkoll fired his rifle and shot out the throat of the grenadier
with the autopistol. The man slipped off the parapet where he had been standing, and ended up sitting, dead, on the
firestep with his back to the trench wall.
Another few seconds of maniacal punching and clubbing, and the last of the raiders dropped back, denied.
Bonin and two Genswickers stood up at the parapet and started firing down into the dark to drive the raiders back
out into the war-waste. Along the trench, Fevrierson and his men were now laying down a serious rifle fusillade
from the step, the chatter of their solid round shots punctuated by the cracks of Mkvenner’s and Hwlan’s lasguns.
Mkoll crouched on the firestep and started to plunder the bombs from the dead grenadier’s waistcoat. The balls
had friction fuses that lit when a paper twist was yanked out. He fired them one by one, tossing them up and out over
the parapet. The stick grenades had long wooden grips like brush handles with loops of linen dangling from pins in
their bases. Mkoll realised you put your hand through the loops before swinging the grenades out. As each one sailed
off, its pin was left hanging from his wrist on the loop. One of Fevrierson’s men, wounded in the arm, came up and
helped him lob the bombs out into the night.
The Tanith sergeant switched round the moment he heard las-fire from his left. Caober and Baen, along with three
Alliance soldiers, came around the next traverse, shooting into the space behind. “Flank attack!” yelled one of the
Alliance men. “Raiders in the fire trench!”
“Hold this wall!” Mkoll yelled to Bonin, and jumped down off the firestep, running along the trench to support
Caober and Baen. Mkvenner was running with him, along with a handful of Fevrierson’s men.
The traverse shielded them all from the raiders in the next section, but also denied them aim. Baen hugged the end
of the traverse and snapped off shots round the corner as often as he dared. A stick bomb came tumbling end over
end across the traverse. Almost too fast to see, Mkvenner caught it in mid-air and slung it back. The blast curled
smoke out round the end of the traverse.
“They’ll be reeling! Rush them!” one of the Genswickers declared, and charged round the end of the defensive
fortification with two of his comrades. All three were riddled with rifle shots and slammed back against the
revetment wall. They hung there for a millisecond and then flopped onto their faces.
Mkoll glanced at Mkvenner.
“Topside, flank and down,” said the tall, grim scout.
Mkoll nodded. He waved Caober with them and pointed Baen to hold the corner of the traverse.
The three Ghosts threw out their camo-cloaks, and sheeted them over their shoulders, draping them expertly so that
one hem-fold formed a hood over their heads.
Then they went up the back wall of the fire trench and over the top.
The surface behind the fire trench was packed earth and pools of mud. It was essentially dark, but the heavy
barrage continued to strobe the entire line with fierce flashes. In the heat of the brutish trench fight, Mkoll had almost
forgotten about the bombardment. It was still going on: the superheavy long range shells plastering the command and
supply trench areas of the entire Peinforq Line as far as he could see. Some shields still held, but only a half-hearted
sporadic barrage answered the enemy thunder.
Mkoll, Caober and Mkvenner crawled forward, shrouded by their capes, hugging the mud. They’d sheathed their
warknives and had slung their lasrifles over their shoulders under the capes so they wouldn’t jar against stones or
metal fragments on the ground. They slithered, feeling their way. Every time the light of a shell-blast lit the sky they
froze.
Down in the trench to their right they could hear Baen and the Genswick boys duelling patchily with the raiders,
squeezing off shots around the traverse. Mkoll could hear the raiders shouting to each other in a language he didn’t
understand. But there was no mistaking the order “Grenadze! Grenadze!”
They were just short of the rear lip now. Mkvenner undid a hoop of stiff but malleable wire from around his waist,
straightened it, and pushed it out ahead of him until the tip just poked over the back edge of the fire trench. The wire
had a strand of fibre optic cable wrapped around it. The tip was a tiny optical cell and at Mkvenner’s end was a
little pin-plug that he attached to his scope. Gently, he moved the wire around and studied the poor resolution images
the cell was sending back down the cable to his scope’s eyepiece.
He raised his hand just high enough for Mkoll and Caober to see. Five fingers, then three. Eight raiders. He moved
his hand laterally, indicating four at the traverse corner, two below them and two more to the left.
Mkoll nodded, and reached back to slide a tube-charge from his webbing pouch. All three of them took off their
las-rifles and laid them on the mud. This was going to be too tight, too constrained for rifle work. They drew out
their pistols and warknives. Mkoll and Caober had standard pattern laspistols and Mkvenner had a .38 calibre auto
with a twelve shot clip that he’d acquired on Nacedon. Caober and Mkvenner armed their pistols and lay face down
with hand guns in their right hands and warknives in their left. Mkoll lay his laspistol on the mud beside his right
hand and clamped his warknife between his teeth. Then he ripped the det-tape off the tube-charge and hurled it down
into the corner of the traverse.
The blast threw the shredded form of one of the raiders right up out of the fire trench. His burning corpse bounced
over the parapet and rolled into no-man’s land.
By then, the three Ghosts had thrown off their cloaks and leapt down into the trench.
Mkoll landed awkwardly but squarely enough to coil into a firing crouch. He aimed right, and put las-rounds
through the backs of two raiders stumbling blindly out of the blast smoke.
Mkvenner came down like a feline between the two raiders directly under their position. He headshot one pointblank,
and as the man spasmed away, spun round and broke the neck of the other with a powerful sideways kick.
Caober’s leap brought him down hard on top of the other two and all three collapsed in a writhing scrum on the
floor of the trench. Fighting to rise, one of the raiders stood on Caober’s ankle and wrenched it badly. The Tanith
yowled and shot him through the pelvis. The raider went over again, screaming and hammering with his arms like a
broken toy. The other raider rolled clear and slashed at Caober with his bayonet. Straight-armed, Caober blocked the
spearing blade with his warknife and shot at the man, but missed. The raider drove on and Caober lost his pistol in
his frantic effort to dodge.
The laspistol lay close by on the duckboards, but Caober didn’t waste time trying for it. He grabbed the barrel of
the raider’s rifle with his now free hand and tugged it past him, stabbing the bayonet into the trench wall under his
armpit and dragging the enemy’s throat onto his extended knife blade. Blood squirted across Caober’s chest. In his
earbead, he heard Mkvenner say, “drop,” and he did so, falling even as the corpse fell.
Five more raiders were hurtling down the trench onto them. Mkvenner ignored the rifle rounds whizzing past him
and strode towards them, firing his pistol. The first and second raiders lurched backwards as if they’d been poleaxed.
The third slumped on his face. The fourth was straggling with a jammed bolt when Mkvenner’s shot snapped
his head round and blew out his cheek. The fifth got off a shot that knocked Mkvenner sideways, blood gouting from
his head.
“Ven!” Caober screamed, and threw himself at the raider, slamming him down hard. Caober pinned the soldier
with his right forearm and expertly rotated his warknife in his left hand, switching the blade from tip up to tip down.
Once it was down, Caober thumped the blade repeatedly into the raider’s chest.
Mkoll had finished off the raiders half-killed by the tube-charge and came running back down the fire trench with
Baen and the Genswick troopers on his heels. Still more raiders, including a grenadier, were behind the second five.
Mkoll’s pistol toppled one, and then Baen was firing on full auto with his lasgun. The Alliance troopers beside
him supported with fire from their rifles.
Mkoll moved forward over the crumpled bodies. “You two! Ahead and secure the trench!” he ordered and a pair
of infantry men ran ahead. “You others, up on the firestep!” The rest clambered up onto the step and began shooting
into the night.
“Trench secure!” one of the Genswickers shouted back. He’d linked up with members of his own platoon pushing
out from behind the next traverse.
“Onto the step, then!” Mkoll urged. “See them off!”
Caober struggled up and ran to where Baen was kneeling over Mkvenner. There was an appalling spill of blood.
“Sacred Feth!” Caober stammered. “Ven!”
“Oh, shut up,” growled Mkvenner tersely. He had a nub of doth jammed to his ear and when he took it away, blood
squirted from his ear. “It took my ear lobe off. That’s all.”
“Feth!” Caober gasped with such relief Baen and Mkvenner both started to laugh.
There were no more raids against station 143 that night, though Fevrierson’s men stood to on the firestep at alert
drill. Word filtered back that stations 129, 131, 146 and 147 had been intruded with serious losses, though by
midnight only 146 was still the scene of fighting as Alliance troops doggedly drove the raiders out. Unconfirmed
reports said that an entire section had been overrun between stations 287 and 311, and from the noise of combat
washing down the line, Mkoll could believe it.
The enemy barrage ended, abruptly, at midnight, leaving just a dismal fog of ash vapour and fyceline smoke
drifting down over the allied lines. At 01.00, the Alliance gun-dens commenced a counter-bombardment that
mercilessly whipped the Shadik front-line positions across the Naeme until dawn.
At 02.15, with the punitive artillery searing the sky behind them, Mkoll assembled his team and bade farewell to
Fevrierson. The young lieutenant saluted and shook Mkoll’s hand, and many of his weary company clapped and
cheered.
“You’re going back?” Fevrierson asked.
“Should have been back long since. We’ve a reconnoitre to report.”
“Thanks,” said Fevrierson. “Thank you. Emperor bless you.”
“These are good men,” said Mkoll, nodding to the mud-spattered infantry all around them. “Keep them tight and
you’ll keep them alive.”
“I hope I never see you again,” said Fevrierson. “I’d never wish this shit-hole on anybody, especially not for a
second time.”
Mkoll nodded. Bonin grinned.
“What will you tell this commander of yours?” Fevrierson asked.
“The truth,” said Mkoll. “The front’s everything he was afraid it would be.”
THREE
A.S. HQ RHONFORQ
“…and to the general disposition of auxiliary support elements, officers of said elements are to answer to (I) the
primary commander of their given area/sector, and (II) the ranking Alliance officer in their specific line
subdivision.”
—Aexe Alliance General Order Book, 772th edition, section 45f, paragraph iv, “Command Protocol.”
From Rhonforq, you could see the massive smoke spume rising from the Peinforq Line ten kilometres away to the
east. During the night, the old chafstone buildings of the town had vibrated to the distant symphony of the guns.
Dawn was at 04.37 Imperial. The sun rose, dull and veiled, over the woods towards Ongche, and mist fumed over
the strand meadows and market gardens west of the town. The Tanith First had slept for about five hours in poor
billets on the southern edge of the town, but most of their motor pool staff and armourers had been up all night.
They’d laid off from the trains at 21.00 the previous evening, along with two companies of Krassians and a
motorised battalion of Seqgewehr coming up from Seronne.
Gaunt rose at 05.00, stiff and sour. All night, despatch riders and material transports had raided by down the street
under his window. He’d been billeted in a pension off the town square. Daur and Rawne occupied rooms there too,
along with five of the Krassian officers and a number of Aexe Alliance staffers. Corbec had elected to billet with the
Ghosts.
Gaunt’s room was small and spare, with low, sloped ceilings and a window that wouldn’t close properly. Beltayn
knocked and brought him a canister of caffeine and a bowl of lukewarm water.
“Mkoll back yet?” Gaunt asked, attempting to shave using the tepid water. Beltayn was laying out Gaunt’s service
uniform on the bed.
“On his way, sir.”
“Delayed?”
“Something was awry.”
“For instance?”
“You heard the shelling, sir. The whole place is buzzing with it. New super-siege guns. The line took a pasting last
night.”
“I thought as much,” said Gaunt. “I wo-oow!”
Beltayn looked up. “Sir?”
“Nicked myself,” said Gaunt, raising his chin to study the razor wound on his throat in the mirror. “This water’s
almost cold, Beltayn.”
“That water’s as warm as it gets unless it decides to be caffeine,” Beltayn said. He brushed the crown of Gaunt’s
cap and set it on the bed. Then he came over to Gaunt and peered at his cut. “You’ve had worse,” he said.
Gaunt smiled. “Thank you for that.”
“What you want is a needle,” said Beltayn.
“A needle?”
“Old family trick. A needle. Excellent when it comes to shaving nicks.”
“How does it work?”
“When you cut yourself with the razor, you take the needle and poke it into your gums.”
“That works?”
Beltayn winked. “Sure as feth blots out the pain of the nick.”
Dressed, and with a tab of Beltayn’s cigarette paper stuck to his shaving wound, Gaunt took his caffeine outside. The
day was clear and promisingly warm, though the stink of fyceline was everywhere. He stopped on the pension’s
terrace to chat with a Krassian major and two officers from the Seqgewehr, and saw Rawne and Feygor demolishing
a fried breakfast in the small dining room.
A column of tanks clanked past through the square. Gaunt finished his drink, put the empty cup on one of the
terrace tables, and walked across the road to the Chapel St. Avigns where the Allied staff headquarters was sited.
Rhonforq was one of the Octal Burgs — eight high church municipalities that sustained the authority of the Sea of
Ghrennes through Mittel Aexe. Its church and cloister had been built in 502, ten years after the first colony footing at
Samonparliane, and before the war its chief activities had been wool-carding, button manufacture and cheese
making. Visitors were invited to throw a coin into the fountain of Beati Hagia or, if they were sound of limb, take in
the hike to the Sheffurd Hills to view the birthplace of Governor-General Daner Fep Kvelsteen, whose autograph
and seal were included in the famous four at the bottom of the Great Aexe Declaration of Sovereignty.
Gaunt knew that much from a dog-eared, obsolete touring guide he’d discovered under his bed the night before.
Allied staff headquarters was thronging with activity. In the inner cloister, a rank of despatch riders waited on
humming motorcycles. Sheafs of telegraph and vox-cable trunked out of windows and noodled up into the dish arrays
anchored to the rooves. A shield mast attached to a portable generator dominated the quadrangle, the grass beneath it
brown and dead from radiation.
Gaunt hurried up the front steps of the main chapel, accepting the salutes of passing Alliance officers.
“Where’s Van Voytz?” he asked an adjutant at the desk.
“You mean General Van Voytz?” the adjutant replied testily without looking up.
“If we’re going to be formal, you say ‘Lord General Van Voytz, colonel-commissar, sir,’” Gaunt growled,
snapping his fingers so that the adjutant would look up. He did and gulped.
“Beg pardon, sir. The lord general has gone ahead to Meiseq, but he’s expected back tomorrow night.”
“I want to vox him.”
“Vox-lines have been cut by last night’s barrage, sir.”
Put another way, something’s awry, Gaunt thought. “What about Lyntor-Sewq?”
“The supreme commander has been called away, sir.”
“Feth it!” snarled Gaunt. “I need to be briefed. I need to see charts! I need—”
“One moment, sir. I’ll ring through.”
The adjutant hurriedly lifted the receiver of his field telephone and cranked the handle. “Colonel-Commissar
Gaunt, for briefing,” he said and paused.
“Wait one moment, sir,” he told Gaunt, replacing the handset.
“Colonel-Commissar!” the voice echoed around the hall. Gaunt looked round to see a tall, pale, ginger haired
officer in a dark red uniform advancing towards him across the paved hallway.
Gaunt saluted him.
“Gaunt, Tanith First-and-Only.”
“Redjacq Ankre, Kottstadt Wyverns. I’m acting authority for the Alliance in Lyntor-Sewq’s absence. Follow me.”
Gaunt fell into step with the taller man, and they walked down towards the doors of the main situations room.
There was something about Ankre, something in his bearing and manner, that made Gaunt bristle. But he ignored the
feeling. He’d been Guard long enough to know that you often didn’t like the men you had to count as allies. Stifling
personal opinion usually helped get the job done.
“I met some of your men last night,” Ankre said, apropos of nothing.
“Indeed?”
“A scout party.”
“Ah yes, I sent them ahead.”
“You didn’t trust our intelligence reports?”
Gaunt stopped and made eye contact with the big redhead. “I’m sure they’re fine. I haven’t actually seen one,” he
said venomously. Ankre paused, not sure how best to deal with the criticism. Before he had time to make his mind
up, Gaunt smoothed past the remark by saying, “So, you were at the front last night?”
“Yes, I was,” the colonel replied stiffly.
“It seemed like you took a bruising. New heavy siege weapons, I hear.”
“I didn’t think you’d read a briefing,” Ankre said, enjoying the slyness of his retort.
“I have eyes and ears. So… new enemy tactics, then? New weapons?”
“Yes,” said Ankre. A sentry in green Alliance fatigues saluted and held the door for them.
The nave of the old chapel had been converted for military use. The windows were taped and blacked, though
Gaunt could make out the lead ridges of the old stained glass. Flak-board baffles lined the room, banked with
sandbags, and the air was dry and warm and smelled of electricity. Glow-globes floated beneath the rafters,
illuminating a central area busy with technicians, aides and officers. Portable codifiers and high-gain vox-casters
had been uncrated and set up on trestles. There was a constant murmur of voices, a chatter of machines, the
occasional whistle of tuning vox-channels, background static. A pair of hooded acolytes from the Adeptus
Mechanicus were blessing the servitors that were being installed at the new Imperial vox-units.
The situations room was a confidential area. Inside the door, Gaunt had to give his name and serial code to a clerk
and was issued with a small green pin-badge. High Command wanted a thorough record of everyone who came and
went.
Ankre led Gaunt across to a chart table, which Gaunt studied keenly. It was a complete mess of over-mapped
gibberish. Ankre gave him a blurred, low-detail map showing only a small field section. It had been printed on
flimsy paper.
“Your regiment is to move up to the 55th sector along communication line 2319 at dusk tonight and take position
along the front to secure stations 287 to 295. Your chain of command is to Major Neillands at station 280 and then to
General Hargunten at Area/Sector. Here are the day’s challenge codes and vox frequencies.” Ankre handed Gaunt a
data-slate. “Familiarise yourself with them and then erase the slate.”
“My chain of command runs through a major?” asked Gaunt. “Is there a problem?”
“This Neillands will relay orders from area/sector?”
“Of course, in the event that you can’t receive them yourself… if, say, vox is down.”
“What if Neillands can’t receive orders from area/sector… if, say, his vox is down? I answer to him?”
Ankre shrugged as if he still couldn’t see what the problem was. “Yes, as I have said—”
“I heard what you said, colonel. I just don’t believe it. You are saying that, in certain circumstances, most likely
the kind of circumstances when it really matters, I am supposed to answer to a junior officer? I am expected to put
my command… my regiment… into his hands?”
Ankre frowned. “Get me the General Order Book,” he told an aide. The man returned in a few seconds bearing a
fat, red-sleeved folder stamped with the Alliance crest and the words “Most Secret — Destroy in Case of Jeopardy.
Ankre leafed through it. Gaunt could see that most of the pages were typewritten inserts, pasted or stapled in. The
supreme commander has this arranged in black and white,” he said, unamused. “His tactical staff working party drew
it up once we’d been advised of your approach. Here… chain of command as I said.”
“Let me see that,” said Gaunt. Ankre seemed reluctant to let the book go, but handed it over after a pause. Gaunt
read down the badly typed order docket. “This says nothing about our position. No specifics. It simply says that we
are to answer to the primary officer of whatever sector we are sent to—”
“That’s General Hargunten.”
“And secondarily to the senior Alliance officer in our line area.”
“Exactly what I said. The senior Alliance officer in your line area is Major Neillands of the Feinster
Highlanders.”
Gaunt shook his head. “I don’t think so. I think rather that Major Neillands should answer to me. In the event that
we lose contact with area/sector, that would be the best protocol.”
“Well, that’s unfortunate,” said Ankre. “The word you seem to be ignoring is ‘Alliance’. You are to answer to the
Alliance chain of command. The supreme commander is merely following the will of the high sezar. He has made it
clear that the Aexe Alliance forces are to remain in control of this war. If that means you have to swallow your pride
and answer to a major, then deal with it. You have come here to fight for the Alliance.”
“I have come here to fight for the Emperor,” Gaunt hissed. “We stand together against Shadik. We of the Guard are
now part of the Alliance.”
“Not technically,” said Ankre, taking the folder out of Gaunt’s hands and thumbing to another page. “Here. It is
quite specific. The Imperial expedition is termed ‘auxiliary support’.”
He closed the folder and smiled as if to suggest he had won the short debate. Gaunt knew there was absolutely no
point arguing with him. He’d met men like Ankre before. He’d go over his head.
Gaunt turned to the chart and found, with some difficulty, the station points Ankre had mentioned. “This is the front
line?”
“Yes.”
“My men are light infantry, specialising in covert action. It’s a waste to put them there.”
“We do not have the luxury of being choosy. Stations 287 through to 311 were overrun last night by the enemy, the
largest breach in the Peinforq Line. The enemy has been driven out, but reinforcement is essential in that area. Vital.
A brigade of Krassians will move forward to fill stations 296 to 311, to the north of you.”
“I repeat my objection.”
“Are you afraid your men will be unable to hold a trench line?”
Gaunt took off his cap and his gloves and set them down on the edge of the chart table. This action gave him a few
seconds to breathe deeply and still his rage.
“I am afraid of nothing except the stupidity of a blinkered high command system,” he replied.
Ankre stepped back a pace and lowered his head slightly, aggressively. “The supreme commander selected the
Tanith for this position entirely on the basis of the good account your scout party made of itself last night. The whole
of 55th sector is talking about it this morning. A handful of men, but they turned the tide at station 143. That’s the kind
of expertise the commander wants at the line, especially at a stretch that is weak and vulnerable.”
“Even if we are merely auxiliary support?”
Ankre handed the folder back to the waiting aide. “I think we’re done here, colonel-commissar,” he said.
“I want a copy of the field charts,” said Gaunt.
“Why?” asked Ankre, now clearly beginning to lose his patience.
Gaunt held up the flimsy field map. “Because this shows only my immediate position.”
“Your point?”
“How can I effect optimal command if I only get to see the specific vicinity? How can I appreciate the battle as a
whole?”
“You don’t need to. You have a specific duty. That is what you must perform. That is all you should be interested
in.”
Gaunt slid the map and the data-slate into his coat and put his gloves and cap back on. “I can’t believe that in this
day and age you’re still fighting wars like this,” he said. “Have you never read Macharius? Solon? Slaydo?”
“None of those fine warriors are here on Aexe,” said Ankre.
“More’s the pity,” snapped Gaunt. He strode away, then turned and glared back at Ankre. “I’ll mobilise my troops.
But I will not move them up the line until I have met with an Alliance commander — any Alliance commander —
who can verify these orders more satisfactorily than you. Make that happen, colonel. Make that happen fast.”
Ankre’s look was murderous. “This is tantamount to insubordination. I could have you—”
“Word of advice,” said Gaunt, cutting in sharply. “You do not ever want to mess with me. Bite your tongue, find
me someone more useful than yourself, and never threaten me again. Are we clear?”
Ankre said nothing. The whole situations room had fallen silent. Gaunt turned his back on them all and marched
out.
“Do me a favour,” sighed Dorden. “Hold the feth still, eh?”
Trooper Caober shrugged. “It’s sore as a scalded shoggy, doc,” he moaned.
“You’re a big boy. Shut up. Do you see Ven making a fuss? You do not. He’s bleeding like a stuck hog, but do we
hear a whimper? We do not at all. So shut up.”
Caober sighed and gritted his teeth. He was sitting up on a wooden table in the Ghosts’ temporary medicae station,
a derelict woollen mill on the southern fringe of Rhonforq. The mill was big and old, built from flinty, black stone,
and straddled a gushing stream that the wool-workers had once used for washing excess lanolin from the fleeces.
There was a damp, fatty smell, and every surface was sticky with grease. The orderlies had offered to scrub it down
with bristle-brushes, but Dorden didn’t suppose they would be there long enough for it to be worth the elbow.
Midday sunlight, hard and yellow, stabbed down through ventilator panels in the high, tiled roof, and lit the hall with
a sickly light. Most of the mill equipment had been shifted out long since. Tiny shreds of wool fibre still dung to
nicks in beams and rough brick edges.
Mkoll’s team had arrived back in Rhonforq at 11.30 that morning, and Mkoll, Caober and Mkvenner had reported
immediately to the medicae station. Dorden was tending to Caober’s wrenched ankle while Lesp dressed
Mkvenner’s ear-wound. Mkoll had said his own injuries could wait. An adjoining mill hall had been occupied by the
Krassian medics, and many voices echoed through from the Krassian troops lining up for inoculator shots.
“How did this happen again?” asked Dorden, examining the scout’s bared foot and ankle. The flesh was puffy and
lilac with bruising.
“It — ow!—it got stood on. There was a fight.”
“So Mkoll says. A good one?”
“So-so. You know.”
Dorden glanced up at Caober. “No, I don’t. Tell me about it. Allow me to live the war vicariously through your
bravado while I stay back here soaking bandages.”
“There was a fight. Ow! A fight. In the trench. Enemies came in, so we fought them. I — ow!—got my ankle stood
on.” Caober faltered and his voice tailed off. He was a fine scout, but his story-telling ability left everything to be
desired.
Dorden continued to wind bandages tightly around Caober’s ankle. “Somebody fill me in. Ven?”
Mkvenner looked up, his ear packed with gauze. “Pardon?”
Dorden laughed, and so did everyone else — Lesp, washing his hands in a tin bowl, Chayker and Foskin sorting
surgical tools. Even Mkoll, sitting on a chair in the corner.
“What’s funny? I can’t hear,” growled Mkvenner. The laughter stopped. No one wanted Mkvenner to think they
were taking the piss out of him. Mkvenner was one of those Ghosts you respected, every second of the day.
“When the barrage started, they tested the line with trench raiders,” Mkoll said as he got up. Dorden could tell at a
glance he was holding himself stiffly as he moved. “It got very messy. The locals weren’t at all prepared.”
Dorden tied off the bandage and called over to Foskin. “Get Caober’s boot back on, loose, and find him a crutch.
Stay off it for a few days and you’ll be good to go.” He wiped his hands and moved over to Mkoll. “Let’s take a
look,” he said.
Mkoll started to take off his webbing and jacket, but it clearly hurt him to lift his arms, so Dorden helped him strip
down to the waist. The bruise across the pale flesh of his chest was ugly and black.
“Feth! You been playing smack-stick again?” asked Dorden.
“Rifle round. Took it last night. Didn’t notice it at the time. Adrenalin, I suppose. Been hurting like a fether since
dawn, though.”
Dorden tutted and sprayed Mkoll’s wound with counter-septic. By his side, Foskin clucked in amazement. He’d
been folding Mkoll’s clothes and kit. He held up a mangled large calibre round. “Your chest armour stopped this,” he
said. “It was buried in your breast-guard. You want me to throw it away?”
Mkoll took it and put in his trouser pocket. He had his own battlefield superstitions.
“I see the war’s started without me,” said a voice from behind them. Gaunt had entered the mill. “Carry on,” he
added, before they all started throwing salutes. He peered at Mkoll’s hefty bruise. “First blood to them, I take it?”
“We gave a good account,” said Mkoll.
“So I hear. I met your fan club. A Colonel Ankre.”
“Who?” murmured Mkoll. “Oh, him. The red-head. I didn’t think he’d taken to us much.”
“You’re the heroes of the line, my friend,” said Gaunt sarcastically. “The locals are so impressed, they’ve given
us a whole front trench to hold.”
“Feth,” Mkoll said.
“You told them—” Dorden began.
“Oh, I told them all right. I don’t think they were listening.” Gaunt sighed. He handed the flimsy map to Mkoll.
“This is what we’re taking on, if they have their way.”
Mkoll looked over the slip. “Bad place. Took the worst of it last night. The very worst The river comes in close
here, you see? The parapet is low and waterlogged. Ideal for storming. I wasn’t sure they’d even got it clear.”
“Tell me what you saw up front,” Gaunt said, sitting down as Dorden dressed Mkoll’s nasty wound.
“The Alliance soldiers we saw were tired and over-stretched. Ill too, most of them. Low sanitation, low hygiene.
What’s worse, they have precious little discipline. They fight well enough when they’re ordered up and controlled,
but there’s no sign of initiative.”
“They panicked when the raid started,” said Caober.
“To be fair,” said Mkvenner, “they panicked when the shelling started. They’d never seen that before, not like that.
I think they were fairly fit as front-line infantry, but when those new super-guns opened up, they were milling and
broken and scared. And the enemy raiders punched right in through them.”
Gaunt nodded. “The enemy?”
“Good, tight professional. Solid ammo weapons, some body armour. The grenadiers are their strength. Simple
explosives, but effective, and in large numbers.”
Gaunt listened to his chief scout and then said, “So… what does Lord General Mkoll think?”
It was a private joke. Gaunt trusted Mkoll’s tactical mind absolutely, and often voiced this hypothetical question.
If Mkoll was supreme commander here, what would he do?
“This fight’ll go on till doomsday,” said Mkoll, once he’d considered things. “It’s been going on forty years. A
deadlock. You might think that Guard reinforcements like us might overtip the balance in favour of the Alliance, but
then so might these new super-guns, in favour of the enemy. What I’m saying is it’ll take something new, something
lateral, to break this. Can’t say what with only this fething map to go by.”
“I’m working on that,” Gaunt assured him.
Mkoll shrugged, and then winced and wished he hadn’t. “I don’t know. Something new. Something different or
unexpected. Something from a new angle. We’d better find out what. Before they do.”
“I know something,” said Mkvenner quietly. “These new super-guns they’ve got. They might have been developing
them for years, but don’t you think it’s funny they first use them a day or two after we arrive? They must’ve seen our
ships coming in. They must know the Guard is here and that the Alliance has off-world reinforcements at last.
They’re afraid the Alliance has got the edge. They want the edge back.”
“I’ll give ’em the edge back,” Caober chuckled, testing the sharpness of his straight silver warknife.
“Hold that thought,” Gaunt told him with a smile. He looked at Mkoll. “Write me up a full report. Everything and
anything.”
“Will do, sir.”
Gaunt was about to say something else when angry voices broke into the mill hall. Ana Curth burst in. “Dorden,
where the feth are — Oh! My apologies, sir.”
Gaunt stood. “As you were, Surgeon Curth. I believe you were about to cuss again.”
“Fething right,” she said. “I can’t find our fething supplies and the supplies should be there and the Krassians are
blaming—”
“Whoa, whoa!” said Dorden. “From the top and remember to breathe this time.”
Ana Curth took a deep breath. She’d been a well-respected and well-paid civilian medic on Verghast before the
Zoican War and, to the amazement of Dorden and Gaunt, had elected to join the Tanith regiment at the Act of
Consolation. No one had ever found out why she’d cast aside a comfortable, rewarding lifestyle in favour of the
thankless miseries of an Imperial Guard medicae posting. Gaunt believed it was because she had a sense of duty that
probably put them all to shame.
They were fething lucky to have her.
“Our supplies are missing,” she said. “All of them. Everything we shipped in from the Munitorium vessels. I
looked for them at embarkation and was told they had been trained ahead. But they’re not here.”
“No, no,” said Chayker. “I saw them. Piled up in the lean-to behind the mill.”
“Oh, there are plenty of gakking crates there, Chayks,” said Curth. “And they’re all marked with the Tanith and
Krassian symbols. But they’ve got nothing in them except dirty cotton wool and straw. The Krassian medics are
trying to give their men field shots, and there’s nothing to use, and they’re claiming we pinched them all—”
“All right, all right…” Gaunt said. “What have we got?”
“About thirty cases of one-shot mire-fever doses and about the same in anti-toxin pills,” said Lesp. “Everything
we brought up the line ourselves, sir.”
“Give them to the Krassians.”
“Gaunt!” Curth started.
“Do it. I won’t have bad feeling with good allies like the Krassians. I’ll find our supplies, and the Krassians’
supplies too. We’ll make do until then.”
“Ever the diplomat, eh, Ibram?” smiled Dorden.
“They once invited me to join the Imperial diplomatic officium,” said Gaunt. “I told them to feth off.”
There was laughter ringing from the old wool mill. His driver had told him this was the place set aside for the
Imperial Guard medicae units. Laughter seemed a strange sound to hear. He walked in from the car, entering a large
hall where eight men and a woman stood around, hooting and chuckling. It seemed like the officer had just told a
really good joke. Four of the men and the woman were medics. The others, apart from the officer in his stem cap,
were black-tunicked troopers, all of them injured.
He cleared his throat and the laughter stopped. They all looked round.
“I believe you were asking for me,” he said. “I am Count Iaco Bousar Fep Golke.”
Count Golke was a quiet, silver-haired Aexegarian dressed in a dark green uniform that showed no decoration apart
from the insignia of Aexegary on the collar and shoulder boards, and the golden aquila medal pinned at his throat. He
walked with a slight limp, and Gaunt could see that his neatly trimmed silver beard had been grown, in part, to
disguise old burns on his cheek and throat. He introduced himself as chief of staff/liaison.
They walked together across the yard outside the mill.
“We’ve met already,” Gaunt said. “In passing. I was one of the Imperial officers presented to you that night at the
high sezar’s palace.”
“I thought so,” replied Golke. “I confess that night I was rather distant. Forgive me if I was distracted. The
surprise news of the Imperial arrival, my unexpected decoration…” He patted the gold eagle medal. Gaunt knew
Golke wasn’t mentioning the fact that he had just been stripped of rank too. That night had marked the end of Golke’s
four year tenure as supreme commander of the Aexe Alliance forces. A blow to his pride, Gaunt imagined. Another
little puffed up aristo general, who’d made his rank by dint of noble blood rather than command merit, now drummed
out of office to make way for the newcomers. Gaunt expected bitterness and resentment. He was surprised when he
detected none. Golke seemed to be nothing except tired and disenchanted.
“My new role,” said Golke, leaning against a gatepost to ease his leg, “as I understand it at least, is to facilitate
communication between the Alliance and the Imperial expedition. It’s all rather formless and vague, so I have to
thank you.”
“How so?”
“Giving me something decent to do, colonel-commissar. Something other than the futile round of cocktail welcome
parties and handshaking. You’ve quite rattled Redjacq Ankre.”
“If I may speak freely?”
Golke made an ushering sweep with his hand. “Colonel Ankre displayed to me a real ignorance of modem warfare
methods. He is blinkered, clinging to outmoded and discredited principles and strategies. Indeed, this whole war—”
Gaunt stopped. “Go on, colonel-commissar.”
“I should not, sir. I barely know you and I don’t feel it is my place to deliver a critique of your nation’s warmaking.”
Golke smiled. It was quite a winning smile, even if one corner of his mouth, fused by scar tissue, refused to bend.
“Colonel-Commissar Gaunt, I was twenty-nine years old when this bloody war began. I served as a front-line
infantry officer for twelve years, then joined the Office of Strategy for another fifteen, then some time in the east, then
five years as area general in sector 59, then four as supreme commander. Never in that time was I one hundred per
cent happy about the way Aexegary prosecuted this war. I criticised, objected, used my rank to try to make changes I
thought would be beneficial. It was like pushing water uphill. So let’s make a deal. Speak freely and speak your
mind. If I am offended, we’ll agree to disagree.”
Gaunt nodded. “Then I’d say this war would have been over thirty years ago if the Alliance had for one moment
overhauled their martial philosophies. You’re fighting this like a pre-firearm campaign, like something from the days
of antiquity. The use of infantry and cavalry, the dependence on cannon, the expenditure of manpower. And, forgive
me, the reliance on the nobility for command personnel.”
Golke chuckled ruefully.
“There is a concept that we in the Guard hold true. Total war. The prosecution of an enemy that takes no account of
national boundaries or political structure. War with a single, unswerving objective, to defeat the foe. War that never
stays still but is constantly looking for new opportunities. True to such a concept, the Imperial Guard has triumphed
over the enemies of the Emperor in all theatres. We advance, both physically and mentally. You have stagnated,
intellectually, as truly and deeply as your front line.”
“You don’t pull punches, do you, Gaunt?”
“Not when I’m invited to throw one for free. Look, sir, I know Aexegary has a long and illustrious history of
military success, but you’re still fighting wars the way your ancestors did. Shadik is not a bellicose neighbour state
to be bested on the field and then invited over for diplomatic reparations. It is a cancer, a spreading evil of Chaos
that will not, ever, play by the old rules. It will grind you down, invade you and consume you.”
“I know that.”
“Then you seem to be alone. Ankre doesn’t know it. Not at all.”
“Ankre is old school. He’s a Kottmarker. They’re anxious to prove their worth in the Alliance. What am I saying?
We’re all old school.” Golke looked over at the roofscape of Rhonforq, squinting as if the afternoon light hurt his
eyes. “Enlighten me, then.”
“In the first place, the Tanith are stealth experts. They’ll fight like bastards in a front line, but that’d be wasting
them. They need to be used, not as cannon fodder, but as the incisive weapons they are.”
“That makes sense.”
“Second… dispersal of information. I know that it’s vital to guard dispositional data from enemy eyes, but this is
plainly ridiculous.”
Gaunt pulled out the scrappy map Ankre had given him. “I think I speak for every Imperial officer when I say that
we need an overall perspective. How can I press any advantages I might make if I have no clear idea of the bigger
picture?”
“Ankre told me you were after general charts. The idea appalled him. Our way of warmaking revolves around
individual commanders performing their appointed tasks and leaving the concerns of general strategy to the staff
chiefs.”
“That’s like fighting blindfold, or at least fighting with just a narrow view through a little slit.”
Golke put his hand in his jacket pocket and produced a data-slate. “Copy everything on this,” he said. “These are
the full charts you wanted. But be circumspect. Ankre and the Alliance generals would have me shot if they thought
I’d given these to you.”
“I’ll be careful.”
“Give me time, and I’ll get the idea accepted by the GSC. If we can prove the advantage, it’ll make it easier for
them to swallow. Your commander, Van Voytz, is working on them too. I don’t believe he’s terribly happy with the
situation either.”
“I didn’t expect he would be,” smiled Gaunt.
“Now do me a favour. Advance your regiment to the appointed stations. Show willing. I’ll go back to the supreme
commander and petition him to act on your advice. A day or two, perhaps three. Then we might see results.”
Gaunt nodded, and shook the count’s hand. “You have the chance to win this war, sir,” he said. “Don’t let the
Alliance waste it.”
FOUR
287-311
“Sergeant Tona Criid? Sergeant Tona Criid? I like the sound of that. No other gak-face will, though.”
—Tona Criid, sergeant
It was the Ghosts’ third day on the line. They’d got used to the routines: the patrol circuits, the wire-expeditions, the
bilge-pumping, the observations, the manhandling of latrine buckets out up the communication trench, the manhandling
of food buckets back down from the cookhouse (“I swear they get those fething buckets mixed up most
times,” Rawne was heard to say). They’d even got used to what Corbec called the “trench walk”—stooped, head
down, so nothing projected above the parapet.
The tension remained. Since the night of Mkoll’s advance party, there’d been no bombardment. On day two, the
enemy had assaulted the line twenty-five kilometres north at station 317, but otherwise it had been quiet.
One-third of the regiment had advanced to the line, leaving the other two-thirds in reserve at Rhonforq. At the end
of the first week, they were to rotate, and begin a pattern that meant no trooper stayed on the line for more than a
week, and every trooper got two weeks’ rest in reserve in every three. Gaunt, of course, hoped the Tanith wouldn’t
be staying at the front for anything like that long.
At the line, the Ghosts were caked in mud after the first few hours, and crawling with lice after the first day. They
slept, as best they could, curled up under the lip of the parapet or in hand-scooped dugouts.
Criid had become so muddy she’d decided not to fight it any more. She’d plastered mud across her face and
matted it into her hair.
“What the feth are you doing, sarge?” Skeen had asked. “Camouflage,” she said.
Fifteen minutes later, all but two of her platoon had followed suit and daubed themselves with mud. Kolea hadn’t,
because he hadn’t understood what was going on.
Cuu hadn’t, because, well, he was Cuu.
Still, Criid congratulated herself, I seem to have most of the platoon pulling together. Maybe I can do this.
Ten platoon occupied station 290, with eleven platoon, Obel’s, to their north, and sixteen platoon, Maroy’s, to
their south.
Each station represented about a kilometre of fire trench, broken in twenty metre intervals by traverses. They had
a dugout bunker with a field telephone and vox, but the Ghosts’ personal vox-links had made that obsolete most of the
time.
Three times a day, Criid did her tour, accompanied by Hwlan and DaFelbe. She checked trench integrity, she
checked that food was getting through, she checked the obs stations. She individually inspected each trooper’s kit,
ammo supply, and feet for trench foot.
The third day was dismal. Rain blew in from the west angled in such a manner that the trench sides offered
absolutely no shelter. The rain also tasted of something, something faintly metallic, faintly chemical. Someone said
that blister gas had been used the day before up north in the Meiseq Box, and some troopers put on their breather
hoods or tied cloth over their mouths. The sky was low and oppressive, churning with fast-moving cloud that was
almost black.
It sapped the colour from the day. Faces became pale, eye sockets shadowed.
Some of the trench’s previous incumbents — the Seventy-seventh Lunsgatte Rifle Brigade —had stayed behind. A
detachment of thirty had been remaindered to man the trench mortars in the pocket dugouts spaced behind the main
fire trench. Their fire-officer, a sergeant called Hartwig, joined Criid when she toured the mortar dens. He was tall
and humourless, huddled in a mud-flecked grey oilskin, toque and a green kepi with a metal badge that showed some
sort of bear-like animal. His men didn’t mix much with the Tanith. They seemed content to live in the cramped
hollows of the dens. Criid got the impression Hartwig and his men didn’t think much of a unit that included women,
let alone one that was led by one.
The mortars were squat, blue-metal machines called feldwerfers, and used compressed gas to fire the three kilo
shells pneumatically. The crews kept the weapons spotlessly clean, they were forever polishing and oiling them. In
contrast, the men themselves were filthy and their uniforms piecemeal. Most wore toques or loose hoods, with
sleeveless leather jackets or fleeces, and many had flat sheets of armour tied or strung across their chests. Dirt caked
their hands and faces black.
Interspersed with the mortars were Favell-pattern spring guns, a heavy little catapult engine that looked to Criid
like some kind of pipe organ. It took two men to operate the double windlass and crank back the long throwing arm
to the cock-stop. When the trigger lanyard was pulled, the cluster of massive springs in the main body of the weapon
slammed the arm up and lobbed grenades or ball bombs out over the fire trench and into the battlefield.
Hartwig assured Criid that the Favell could send a grenade over two hundred and fifty metres. The trick was to set
the grenade’s fuse so that it didn’t detonate high in its arc. They needed to blow on the ground, or near it, but if the
grenadiers left the fuse too long, there was a risk that the enemy would have time to gather them up and toss them
back. One member of each spring gun team had a clay pipe on the go at all times, an ignition source ready and
waiting to start fuses that was a lot less fiddly than matches or gun-string.
The Seventy-seventh Lunsgatte weren’t the only prior inhabitants who had stayed in the fire trench. Shrunken,
eroded body parts protruded from the trench floor and sometimes the wall, usually where the rain had exposed them.
During a heavy period of action three years before, Criid learned, the troops at these stations had been obliged to
bury their dead in the trench itself. Water damage was slowly raising them back into the daylight.
During her midday tour on the third day, Criid found Lubba and Vril trying to shore up a section of revetment that
was falling in thanks to the rain. Part of the parapet overhang had become a gutter for the rainwater, which was now
gushing into the trench in a thick stream. The task was made all the more unpleasant because where the timber had
come away, ancient cadavers had been exposed, curled and almost mummified.
“Gak,” she said, viewing the scene.
“We need more planks,” said Lubba. “Even if we get these back in place, they’re rotten through.” Criid looked at
Hartwig. “Planking? Flakboard?” He laughed at her. “You’re joking.”
“Any suggestions, then?” she said. She was quickly becoming tired with Hartwig’s dreary resignation.
“There’s sometimes some brushwood at station 282. They bring it forward along the supply trench there when its
available.”
“Brushwood?”
“Anything will do,” said Vril.
Criid turned to Hwlan. “Go on down to 282 and see if you can get your hands on some.”
“Yes, sarge.”
“What about damming that stream?” DaFelbe suggested, pointing at the liquid mud gushing down over the lip.
“We’d have to get up over the parapet. So I’d rather be wet than dead,” said Vril.
“After dark, then?” Criid ventured.
“Sure, sarge. Once it’s dark.”
There was a wet, loose gurgle and another section of the revet slumped into the trench where Lubba was trying to
force it back in. Greasy mud slithered out, shedding another vile body with it. The corpse was staring, its jaws open
in a scream, but its eyes and mouth were full of mud.
“Oh gak… Hwlan!” Criid called after the scout. He stopped and looked back.
“See if you can find Zweil too.”
Hwlan nodded.
They moved on a little way. Criid checked the next two or three troopers at the firestep: Vulli, Jajjo, Kenfeld,
Subeno. Kenfeld’s boots were leaking and he needed foot-powder.
Then they reached Cuu, or at least Cuu’s position. The firestep was empty.
“Mkhef!” Criid called to the next man along. “Where’s Cuu?”
“Latrine, sarge!” the trooper called back.
They waited, and Cuu reappeared. As soon as he saw Criid, he unslung his rifle and held it out for inspection,
wordlessly. There was no expression in his eyes. His face still bore the bruise marks where she’d dented it.
“You left your post, Cuu.”
“Had to.”
“You wait until change-over.”
He shook his head. “Couldn’t wait. My belly’s a mess. Gakking food round here. An emergency, sure as sure.”
“How long have you been sick?”
“A day.” He did look pale and unwell, now she came to look. “You keeping anything in?”
“Going right through me,” he said with unnecessary relish.
“Signal a man up to cover,” she told DaFelbe, then she looked back at Cuu. “Report to Dorden. Get him to fix you
up with salts or a shot. Then right back here, you understand me? I want you back before 13.00, no excuses.”
“Okay,” said Cuu, picking up his kit. “Back by one, sure as sure.”
Criid watched Cuu walk away until he was out of sight round the next traverse. “He’s trouble, that one,” said
DaFelbe. “Sure as sure,” she replied.
In the next fire bay, Criid found Pozetine, Mosark and Nessa Bourah huddled in scrapes hulled out under the dripping
parapet. They were playing dice, but she could tell their hearts weren’t in it. She ran a quick inspection, though the
three were able troopers who didn’t need much steering, and asked if there were any problems.
“Only the waiting,” said Pozetine. He was a short, square-set Vervunhiver with a boxer’s splayed nose, ex-Vervun
Primary, and a hell of a shot. A shoe-in for sniper specialisation in fact, had it not been for his grievous lack of
patience. He worried, he fidgeted. A sniper he was not.
“Waiting’s always the killer,” said Criid.
Pozetine nodded. “S’why I hate digging in, sarge,” he said. His fingers were working the dice, making them move
in and out between his knuckles. An edgy and all too practiced tick.
“Bide your time,” said Criid.
“What I keep telling him,” signed Nessa, a model of calm.
It was easy to say. No soldier liked the waiting hours. They had a habit of magnifying fears and gnawing at nerves.
But they got to Pozetine worse than most.
“Do something,” Criid suggested. “I could find you a job. Latrines—”
“Gak that,” growled Pozetine. Mosark laughed. “Then take a turn on lookout.”
“I offered, but he’s happy and set.” The “he” Pozetine referred to was Kolea, down at the end of the bay. He was
motionless, peering through a stereoscope rigged to peak out over the parapet.
Criid walked along the duckboards to him. “Kolea?”
He didn’t move. She put a hand gently on his arm and he looked up. She could tell it took a moment for him to
work out who she was.
“You okay? You’ve been watching a long time.”
“Don’ mind it. I can watch.”
He could at that. If Pozetine was the most impatient man in the platoon — gak, the entire regiment — then Kolea
had become the most focused and tranquil.
She knew for a fact that he’d been manning the scope for at least two hours, slowly playing it back and forth
through a one-eighty arc. He didn’t get bored, he didn’t get tired. She’d have pulled any other man off the duty ages
before for fear that fatigue would make him sloppy. Not Kolea.
Criid didn’t know precisely what the loxatl munition had done to Kolea’s brain. Surgeon Curth had tried to
explain it to her, but the technical terms had been beyond Criid. Something to do with memory and personality. All of
it, ruined. Gol Kolea, the scratch company hero, wise, smart, strong… lost, and only this physical shell of him left
with them. His dependability had survived, and expressed itself in an extraordinary attention span.
Or at least, Criid told herself, an ability not to get bored with the most mundane tasks. Kolea could watch the line
vigilantly for hours. Pick up a conversation five minutes after it had lapsed and he wouldn’t know what you were
talking about.
Criid had admitted it to no one, but Kolea was the biggest problem in her command. Gaunt assumed it would be
Cuu, but she knew she could handle that gak-pellet. No, it was Kolea. Ten was Kolea’s platoon, for a start. He’d
forged the unit. It was his still. If he’d died, that would have been a different ball game, but he was still here, a
constant reminder of his mental absence, of the void where his inspired leadership had been.
Worse still, he’d only ended up this way because of her. She’d been wounded during the fight for Ouranberg.
Kolea had carried her to safety and taken his headwound as a consequence. She’d never found out why, really. Varl
had said that it was simply Kolea’s way. He’d never leave a trooper down and in danger. Maybe so. But it felt like
something else. Like Kolea had needed to save her for some reason, something more than simple loyalty.
Caffran reckoned it was because of the kids. Kolea had sometimes referred to the two orphans Criid had rescued
from Vervunhive as a “little piece of good”, and Caffran believed Kolea had taken an almost patriarchal interest in
looking after Criid and Caffran, the kids’ ersatz parents.
Whatever. She’d never know. She’d never be able to ask Kolea, because Kolea couldn’t even remember
Ouranberg, let alone the motives that had once driven his life.
“You get tired, you sing out,” she said.
“Don’ worry, sarge.”
“You see anything, you sing too.”
His big fingers reached into the neck of his field coat and held out the tin whistle. He beamed. “Got my blower.”
“Good,” she said. “Carry on, Trooper Kolea.” She got up, but his next words stopped her in her tracks. “The
kids.”
“What?”
“What?” he echoed.
“What did you say, Gol? Just then?”
“Um…” he thought about it. “The kids. They gonna be okay? They all right?”
“They’re fine,” she said. Her heart was banging in her ribcage. It was almost like the old Gol Kolea was in arm’s
reach.
“They’re young,” he said. “Yes, they are.”
“But I guess they’ll manage. If you say they’re all right.”
“They will.”
He nodded. “So young. S’pose war is all they’ve known. But so young, most of them. Boys. Not even shaving yet.
Acting like soldiers.”
The Aexe Alliance troopers. That’s what he was talking about. Everyone in the regiment had been shocked to see
how terribly young most of the local soldiery was. “Kids,” Lubba had said.
Dear God-Emperor. Not her kids at all. She’d seen a spark, just for a second, but it had been false. “Carry on,”
she said.
“You okay there, sarge?” asked DaFelbe.
“Yeah. Grit in my eyes,” said Tona Criid.
The canteen barrow had passed along the fire trench north of station 290 about fifteen minutes before, dishing out
pieces of dry rye-bread and a watery gruel made of fish stock and tough root vegetables to the men of eleven platoon.
Now Trooper Gutes was coming along through the rain with the wash bin, collecting up the troopers’ mess tins to
take them up the supply trench and rinse them at the standpipe tap at rear/290.
It was a rota task, and Gutes had drawn for the day. He didn’t grumble, but it was a scummy job. By the time he’d
collected all the mess tins, the wash bin would be slopping and full. Piet Gutes was one of the older Tanith troopers,
drawn and tired. It wasn’t physical fatigue he suffered from. It was the wearying attrition of Guard life. The hopeless
straggle to get through each day, knowing there was no happy ending waiting for them. No homeworld. No family
embrace to return to.
The day Tanith had died, Gutes’ daughter Finra had been twenty-one, and her daughter Foona just four months old.
It had been a wrench leaving them, but the Emperor called, and the Emperor was the Emperor.
Piet Gutes woke up some nights, sit-up-straight awake, with the last fire-flash of Tanith fading in his mind’s eye.
That final, shuddering cough of flame and light that signalled the death of the world that’d raised him. It had been just
a little thing, a wink in the night He’d witnessed it from the obs ports of the troop ship. Just a tiny, silent flash.
How could that have been Tanith dying, he often wondered. The mantle splitting. The oceans evaporating. The
continents sliding into each other and disintegrating. The great nalwood forests licking into cinders in a wall of white
heat. The core, cut loose, erupting and boiling out into the vacuum. Piet Gutes supposed that anything, even the most
important and profound event in his life or anyone’s life, would seem like nothing more than a tiny, silent flash if you
saw it from far enough away.
He wondered about it, sometimes, washing grease off mess tins, sorting power dips, sewing buttons back onto his
tunic. The galaxy was big and everything in it was small, and he was small too. The Emperor’s dead! Really?
Yeah… that tiny flash just then. Did you see it? The Imperium’s fallen! Sacred feth, you kidding? No… just that little
flash. You must’ve noticed.
Far away. That’s where he’d like to be. “Far away up in the mountains”, like the old song. It was all he wanted
these days. To be so far away that everything looked small and insignificant.
“Tins! Tins!” he called, plodding down the fire bay with both hands on the yoke of the big metal pail. Garond
tipped his in, then Fenix and Tokar.
“Thank you kindly,” Gutes said to each, his voice so rich with sarcasm it made them laugh.
He straggled into the gun-nest where Caill and Melyr were hunched down beside their support weapon. Caill
tossed his tin in, half-finished, but Melyr was still chasing the last drips of gravy with a scrap of Caill’s left over
bread.
“Feth, you like that stuff?”
“Good eating, if you’ve a hunger,” said Melyr.
Gutes liked Melyr. Heavy-set, solid, an ace with a fat cannon or a rocket tube. But he hated seeing him there.
Bragg had been eleven’s cannon man. Hark had switched Melyr in from twenty-seven when Bragg was killed. It was
almost unseemly. Caill, the best ammo humper in the regiment in Gutes’ opinion, had just about been wedded to
Bragg. Now here he was running boxes and feeding belts for someone else.
Times change. Needs must. Get far enough away and none of it looks big enough to be important anyway.
Melyr finished up, smacked his lips appreciatively, and plonked his mess tin into Gutes’ wash bin.
“My compliments to the chef,” he said.
“Melyr, man, you’re a fething lunatic,” said Gutes.
“You wanna worry,” said Caill. “I have to sit beside this feth-head.”
“Sit further back and it won’t seem to matter so much,” Gutes suggested. “What?”
Gutes shook his head. He was glad Caill was settling in with his new partner. That’s what really counted. He
knew Caill was still down on himself. He’d left Bragg to run for fresh ammo, and by the time he’d got back, Bragg
was done. Three loxatl flechette rounds at close range, that’s what Gutes had heard. Like he’d eaten a tube-charge.
So much mess they’d been hard pushed to find enough to bury, and Bragg had been a big guy.
Feth happens, Gutes thought.
He stumbled on, under a reinforced arch, into the next fire bay, wishing he had a hand free to brash away the biterflies
that buzzed around his face. Loglas had told him about a trooper up the line who’d let those things settle and
then woke up with his brain eaten out by hatching larvae.
Piet Gutes didn’t fancy that. He did however wonder how someone with his brain eaten out by larvae had
managed to wake up at all. An inconsistency in the story. Maybe Loglas had been pulling his leg.
“Everything all right, Piet?” called Sergeant Obel, coming the other way down the trench with his runner.
“Fine, sir.”
“You got mine already,” said Obel.
“I did so,” said Gutes. Every Ghost’s mess tin was etched with his surname and pin code. The fun part of this job
was getting the right tin back to the right body.
Fun part. Yeah, right. There was nothing about the collection, cleaning and redistribution of mess tins that could be
considered fun.
“Carry on, Gutes,” Obel said.
Gutes stopped at the end of the bay and put his bucket down. Greasy slops rocked out over the lip. “Hey, Larks?”
Mad Larkin slowly turned back from the loophole where his long-las was resting. He smiled slightly when he saw
Gutes. They’d been good buddies since the Founding Fields. It was nice to see him smile. Larkin seemed edgier than
ever these days. He and Bragg had been particularly close.
“Got your tin?” Gutes asked.
Larkin looked around and eventually produced his mess tin from a shelf in the revet side. It was full of gruel, the
hunk of bread disintegrating into it.
“Ah, Larks, you gotta eat.”
“Not hungry, Piet.”
“You gotta eat, but.”
Larkin shrugged.
Gutes picked up the tin. “You sure you don’t want this?”
“Yeah. No appetite.”
“Okay, then.” Gutes left his slop bucket next to Larkin’s firestep and went back down the trench. Melyr accepted
the bonus rations with delight. “You gotta wash that up yourself and get it back to Larks,” Gutes told him.
He went back to his wash bin.
“What you doing, Larks?” he asked.
Larkin had been working a screwdriver into the setting of his rifle scope. “Calibrating,” he said.
Every sniper calibrated their scopes. It was a given. An adjustment to the milled ring on the back-sight, a moment
to let the sighting scanner read your retina and set up the hairs, but Larkin played around more. He tweaked off the
inspection cover and overrode the reader, calibrating his weapon to nuances of windspeed and shot-drop that were
too subtle for the scope to set automatically. Gutes had heard him say sometimes that he saw the truth through his
scope. The view through the scope was the one reality Larkin trusted.
“You wanna be careful no tech-priest catches you doing that,” Gutes admonished. “They’d have you burned at the
stake.”
“So don’t tell ’em,” said Larkin.
“I won’t,” said Gutes. Larkin was the best shot in the regiment, and Gutes wasn’t about to tell him his job, even if
tinkering with military tech was strictly forbidden. That was the province of the tech-priests, who guarded their
secrets jealously. If Larkin had to be a heretic to shoot so well, that was fine with Gutes.
Gutes pulled up his sloshing bin and trotted on, picking up the last of the mess tins and then heading west up the
supply trench.
“Hey, Larks.”
Larkin looked up from his scope, thinking Piet Gutes had come back for some reason. It wasn’t Piet Gutes. “How
you doing?” said Lijah Cuu.
“What the feth?” Larkin cowered back into the corner of the firebay, his hand trying to find the hilt of his knife.
“What the feth are you doing here?”
“Oh, now, that’s not nice.” Cuu crouched on the firestep, elbows resting on his knees. “Just dropped by to say
hello to a friend. And you’re acting all unfriendly.”
“No,” mumbled Larkin.
“Yes, you are, sure as sure.”
“What do you want?”
Cuu straightened out his lean legs and sat down on the step with his back to the parapet. “Like I said, just saying
hello.”
“You shouldn’t be here,” said Larkin.
“Who’s gonna know, tell me that? I’m meant to be seeing the doc. Who’s gonna miss me? Who’s gonna worry
about two buddies chatting together?”
“I’m not your buddy,” Larkin said bravely. His hand had found the knife now. He kept it behind his back.
Cuu thought about that. “Maybe not. Maybe not.”
He leaned forward, pushing his scar-split face right up into Larkin’s. “Buddies ain’t the right word, is it, Tanith?
We got a score, you and me. You sold me out, sold me out to the commissars, back on Phantine. You and that big
dumbo.”
“Don’t call him that!”
“Big dumbo? Why the gak shouldn’t I call that big dumbo a big dumbo? He was a big dumbo, sure as sure.”
“Shut up!”
“Hey, I’m just being nice and saying hello.” Cuu’s voice dropped to a raw whisper. “We got a score, Tanith. You
know it, I know it. It’s gonna get settled. Thanks to you, I got flog-scars on my back. I think about you, most nights.
You and that holier-than-thou big dumbo. Sooner or later, you’re gonna pay.”
Larkin pulled back even further. He knew he had no hope of getting his long-las free from the loop-hole. He
wanted to shout out but there was no one around.
“What do you mean, pay?”
“Sooner or later, sure as sure. War’s a messy thing, Tanith. Confused and all shit like that. Middle of combat all
crap flying this way and that. Who’s gonna notice if I get my payback? You’d just be another body in the count.”
“You wouldn’t dare!”
“Oh, wouldn’t I now? You’ll get yours, just like big dumbo got his.”
Hlaine Larkin was petrified. Ever since Phantine, he’d been guarding his back, waiting for this moment. And now
Lijah fething Cuu had just come up on him when he least expected it. But those last few words bit clean through his
terror.
“What do you mean, he got his? What the feth does that mean?”
“Terrible shame. Big dumbo buying the farm like that.”
“No… no, that’s not what you meant. Not at all! Feth… feth, you bastard… you killed him!”
“As if,” smiled Cuu.
“You bastard! I’ll take this to Gaunt—”
Cuu snapped out a hand and closed it tightly around Larkin’s throat. His eyes went dark, like a cloud had passed
across the sun.
“Oh no you won’t, you little gak. Who’d believe you, eh? Where’s your gakking proof? This is just between you
and me. You and me. Our little score. And it’ll get settled, sure as sure. You’ll know why. And I’ll know why, and
everyone else can take a gakking jump. You’ll pay for the flog-scars I got. You’ll pay with scars of your own.”
Larkin yanked out his knife. Straight silver, thirty centimetres. Tanith First-and-Only warblade. In simple
desperation, he lunged at Cuu.
Cuu was ready. He blocked Larkin’s wrist with his left fist, turning the knife aside, and tightened his choke hold.
Larkin writhed away, but he was penned in and trapped, like an animal, like prey.
Cuu cuffed him around the temple and, as he swayed, dazed, threw him off the firestep. Larkin landed shoulders
first on the duckboards, feeling them squelch underneath him.
His fingers groped for his warknife. It was in Lijah Cuu’s hand.
Cuu stood over him, raised Larkin’s knife to his mouth and slowly licked the blade. The tiniest drop of blood
welled up and fell onto Larkin’s forehead.
“You’re fething crazy!” Larkin gasped.
“Sure,” said Cuu, “as sure. We’ve come this far Let’s do it.”
He flew at Larkin, blade extended. Larkin remembered the combat moves Corbec had told him, and rolled, kicking
Cuu’s legs away. Cuu crashed over, ripping the blade sideways and tearing a strip out of Larkin’s trousers. Larkin
squealed and kicked out again. But Cuu moved like a snake, wrapping himself over and under Larkin’s jerking limbs.
The blade was at Larkin’s throat. He felt its edge bite into his skin.
“What the feth is this?”
Loglas was coming down the trench bay towards them, his hands balled into fists. “Cuu? What the feth are you
doing?”
Fighting the pressure at his neck, Larkin screamed. Oddly, his scream sounded like a whistle.
A whistle. Two more blew. Then another.
Loglas halted and looked up. The shell hit the back wall of the firebay and went off, kicking mud and slime and
pieces of flakboard fifty metres into the air. A twenty-pounder at the very least.
Larkin saw it, saw the actual shell. The flint-grey casing, the barbed fins, like it was a piet playing in slow motion.
He saw the huge flash. He saw one of the fins, a broken chunk of metal twenty centimetres by ten, whizzing out from
the impact, turning in the air like a kid’s throw-toy.
Loglas was reeling back from the concussive force of the blast when the flying fin hit him in the face. In slow
motion, Larkin saw the way it made Loglas frown, then grimace, then twist his features into an expression no human
face could make while it was alive.
Loglas’ face caved in nose first, and his forehead tore away from his scalp like a yanked curtain. His head
convulsed with the whiplash, his neck shattering as it bowed back. His face vanished, sucked into the hole that was
being driven into the front of his head, and then the whirling fin came out the back, strewing skull shards and bloody
matter ahead of it.
“Nooo!” Larkin howled. Then he went deaf as the blast roar hammered him.
Colm Corbec had emerged from his dugout at station 295 approximately sixty seconds before the first shell landed.
He paused on the firestep, frowning, cupping his hands to shield his eyes from the rain.
“Chief?” asked Rerval, his vox-officer. “Something up?”
Corbec had smelled ammonil wadding on the wind. Batteries loading up for barrage. Rerval watched with horrid
fascination as Corbec slowly raised his whistle and blew.
Rerval grabbed up the vox-horn and started to yell. “Incoming barrage!”
He repeated the cry three times before there was an ominous click which announced that the e-mag pulse of the
enemy guns had killed the vox-signal.
Then the shells started to land.
They fell in the rain. They fell like rain. They scattered in and out of the leading fire trench of the Peinforq Line’s
55th sector from station 251 right up to 315 and over into 56th sector as far as 349.
Ten shells a second, heavy gauge from the deep super-siege batteries, and smaller howitzer rounds from the
Shadik front. In a space of two minutes, the air was full of mud fog and the atomised steam of debris over a stretch of
fifteen kilometres. The ground was quaking.
Between 293 and 294, Rawne and Domor got their troopers into cover. Amongst three platoon, Wheln and Leclan
took shrapnel hits, Torez lost an arm and Famoss was decapitated. Five metres of fire trench and a traverse simply
vanished in a blizzard of spraying earth.
Sergeant Agun Soric slept through the first thirty seconds of the onslaught. The roar and vibration didn’t wake him. It
took Trooper Vivvo, shaking him and yelling in his face.
Soric blinked open his single eye and looked up at Vivvo’s pale face in the halflight of station 292’s dugout.
“What?” he asked, tersely. But there was a background clamour of thunder and voices, and the little camp table
was jarring.
“Gak!” Soric snorted, and scrambled up. How could he have slept through this?
Over the constant howl of shells, he could hear debris spattering off the dugout wall. Someone was screaming for
a medic.
Short, stocky, grizzled, possessed of a mighty laugh and a temper corrosive as acid, Soric had been a smeltery
boss back on Verghast. In the war there, he’d become a troop leader ad hoc, a resistance fighter. His exploits had left
him with scar-tissue in place of one eye, a limp, and the eternal respect of Vervunhivers. Ibram Gaunt hadn’t thought
twice about making Soric a senior platoon leader.
His ability to sleep was a throwback to the old days, when he’d been able to catch a nap despite the tumult of the
smeltery line. Now the knack seemed like a liability.
He bundled Vivvo outside, pressing a hand down on the younger man’s shoulders to keep him low. The air was
full of billowing, opaque fog that made them both choke and gasp violently. They couldn’t see anything except the
swirling vapour and fuzzy, bright flashes. The parapet at 292 was particularly low and waterlogged; a wide lake
formed against its outside lip. The shells falling into it had raised the dense steam and coiling vapour.
“Gak! Back inside, son!” Soric coughed, and shoved Vivvo back into the dugout. He stood alone for a moment,
though how alone he couldn’t tell. There could be men just a few metres away, Soric thought, and I can’t see them.
He tried to shout out, but his mouth filled with mud droplets and he started choking again. Besides, the continuous
noise of detonations totally drowned him out.
Soric staggered back into the dugout. Vivvo was on his hands and knees, his arms wrapped protectively over his
head, retching up muddy liquid.
“We’re going to die, boss!” he hacked.
“Did we die on Verghast?”
“N-no…”
“Then I’m sure as gak not going to die on this arse-wipe world.” Soric sat down on the canvas stool. Something
jabbed into his hip and he discovered a message shell in the pocket of his breeches. He couldn’t remember putting a
message shell in his pocket.
He unscrewed the brass cap and shook out a small fold of blue tissue paper. A sheet from a Guard issue despatch
pack. Every sergeant had one, though they were seldom needed because of the vox-link. They were for emergencies,
and Soric was sure he hadn’t used his pack since they’d arrived. But when he looked around, he saw it lying on the
dugout’s shelf, the paper seal torn off and the top sheet missing.
Soric unfolded the sheet. The brief message was hand written in pencil. “Bombardment for sixteen minutes, then
foot assault from the north-east, under cover of the drain outfall.”
He read it again. His fingers shook a little. There was no mistake about it. It was his handwriting.
A whooping shell struck the third traverse along from station 289, and threw clods of earth and pieces of wood and
brick out along the fire trench. Gaunt threw himself flat, dragging Beltayn down with him. The troopers around them
were hurled over by the concussion.
As debris and rain spattered down over them, Gaunt got up. He’d lost his cap. A man was wailing pitifully nearby.
“Beltayn?”
His adjutant rose slowly. “You all right?”
“Feth,” Beltayn grumbled, fiddling with his left hand. His thumb was dislocated. “Something’s awry here…”
Beltayn’s voice faded off as he saw the corpse of Trooper Sheric on the duckboards at his feet. The blast had
mutilated the side of Sheric’s head and jammed a broken plank through his upper torso. It made Beltayn’s dislocated
thumb suddenly seem quite insignificant.
Nearby, two other men from fifteen platoon were trying to field dress Trooper Kell’s torn belly. It was Kell doing
the wailing: a feeble, sick-animal sound. Yellowish loops of intestine were spilling from the bright red gashes in his
black tunic.
Sergeant Theiss, the normally cheerful commander of fifteen platoon, ran up with one of his corpsmen. He said
something to Gaunt that was inaudible over the shell fall. Gaunt waved him off and pointed to Kell.
Gaunt had been at station 289, reviewing muster, when the bombardment started. He cursed the sense of
displacement. His own platoon, one, was at station 291, with Caober in charge. There was no way he’d be able to
rejoin them in this.
He got up onto the firestep and viewed back down the line through the scope Beltayn handed up to him.
“Throne of Terra…” he murmured.
The valley was an inferno for as far as he could see. Banks of smoke, as vast and dense as thunderheads, hung
over the fire trenches, obscuring the view. Shell blasts stippled through the smoke, catastrophic and murderous. An
immense fire burned down in the vicinity of 256. At 260, it looked as if an entire section had been gutted. The
barrage was creeping back into the supply and communication trenches. Shields had come on over the rearline and
command sections, but they weren’t the day’s targets. Today, the Shadik guns were striking at the infantry lines. And
that could mean only one thing. It was the prelude to an offensive.
A whistle blew. It was Kolea at his spotter scope. “They’re coming!” he cried.
Criid tumbled out of the scrape she’d been sheltering in. Steam and fyceline fumes clogged the trenchway. Station
290 had taken some hits in her post, but nothing like the punishment she’d seen fall on Maroy’s section.
She blew her own whistle. “Fix blades! Stand ready to repel!” She dearly wanted to check on Maroy’s mob, but
there was no time for that. Around her, the troops of nine platoon got up onto the firestep, warknives locked into the
lugs of their lasrifles.
The shells were still falling. It seemed to her impossible that the enemy would advance into this.
But she trusted Gol Kolea. He’d never lied before and he wouldn’t lie now.
Crouched on the rain-slick paving slabs of the step, she peered out through a loophole. Through the churning
vapour, she saw figures, running forward at a halting pace, weapons swinging. Mkoll had briefed the First. Don’t let
them get close enough to deploy grenades. Hand bombs are their way into the line.
But a spring gun or a pneumatic mortar could throw a lot further than a man.
“Hartwig! Target the slopes, now!”
“Yes, ma’am!”
In the face of the bombardment, their little answering barrage seemed feeble as it began. Spring guns cracked and
mortars drummed. There was a satisfying ripple of light munitions from beyond the parapet.
“Keep it up!” she yelled. She risked another look and saw the advancing line of Shadik troopers, just blurs in the
fog. Many staggered or were thrown up as ball bombs and mortar rounds fell amongst them.
She glanced down the line. Nine platoon was crouched, ready. She saw Vril spit and shake out his neck. She saw
Jajjo drying the grip of his las on his cloak. She saw Nessa, still as a statue at her long-las. Nessa’s hair was still
boyishly short from the pre-mission buzz-cut she’d had on Phantine, and from some angles she could be mistaken for
one of the younger men. One trooper — Criid thought it was Subeno — was vomiting with nerves, but still holding
his place.
“Straight silver!” Criid bellowed. “Step up and fire at will!” Her first battlefield order to the troops.
As one, nine platoon rose and rested their lasrifles on the parapet. They started shooting, dropping the nearest
Shadik assaulters as support blasts from Hartwig’s gun-dens lofted up over them.
Criid tried to find a target, but it was like aiming into murky water such was the density of the smoke boiling back
off no-man’s land. A raider in a chain-veil helmet suddenly loomed, winding up to hurl a stick bomb, and she
squeezed the trigger. By her side, DaFelbe saw him too, and they killed the raider simultaneously. The stick grenade
bounced away and blew up.
Now there were more, and they were running for the line. Some moved in groups, carrying makeshift stormshields
made of overlapped flakboard. Criid slammed off five shots at one shield, but it didn’t slow down. It was
just six metres from the parapet when a spray of fluid fire washed across it and turned it into a squealing mass of
flames and thrashing human torches.
Lubba fired again, hosing the immediate vicinity with his flamer. Criid could distinctly hear his tanks knocking and
spluttering despite the fury of the shells. Tracer shots began stitching across the muddy slope from the platoon’s
support weapon. Figures danced and jerked. Some hung in the wire.
Hand bombs started to bounce in at them. Criid had to duck fast as one went off right under the parapet. DaFelbe
toppled off the step, clutching his right cheek where a hunk of shrapnel had punched into his jaw.
“Medic!” Criid yelled. She started firing again. They were so damn close now, and despite everything, there were
so damn many.
Brin Milo, the youngest Ghost of all, was right beside his platoon sergeant when the raiders came leaping in. One
went right over Milo’s head and fell down as he landed awkwardly on the duckboards. Sergeant Domor turned and
shot him dead where he lay.
They’d been swarmed. Sheer numbers had flung themselves at 293 and 294 and made it over the parapet. Now
three and twelve platoon faced the very worst that trench warfare had to offer. Hand-to-hand in the narrow trench
gully.
The raiders wore khaki and brown, and most had gas-hoods and heavy helmets damped over their heads. They
carried old-pattern autorifles, pistols and curved hangers.
The world became very, very small. Just a tight space between earthen walls, deafened by shells, full of jostling
bodies. Milo slashed and jabbed with his bayonet staggering back a step as blood gouted over him, and then fired
point-blank at a khaki figure clawing at him.
For a while — longer than most of the Ghosts had been comfortable about to be truthful — Milo had been the only
civilian to escape the fall of Tanith. Gaunt had rescued him, though sometimes Milo liked to explain it had been the
other way around. Because of that, he’d been seen by all as one part mascot, one part lucky charm… and his skill
with the Tanith pipes had come in handy.
Milo had made trooper as soon as he was old enough. According to Corbec, Varl, Larkin, Bragg — God-Emperor
rest him — Milo had received more combat experience by the time he sewed on his first cap badge than many
Guardsmen did in five years.
That was how it went when you were one of Gaunt’s chosen. At his own request, Milo had been placed in
Domor’s platoon. He knew a spot in one, Gaunt’s own, was likely, but he wanted to distance himself a little from his
“saviour”. And from the notion that he was Gaunt’s lucky mascot.
Brin Milo was no mascot. He was twenty-one years old standard, tall and strong, and he’d take no feth from
anyone now. Despite his age, the Ghosts — especially the Tanith — took him quite seriously. Though Milo only
suspected it, both Gaunt and Corbec considered him squad leader material.
Brin Milo had something to prove. It would be his destiny to have something to prove until the day he died.
Barely twenty metres north of Milo, Rawne’s platoon was fending off an assault too. The trench was packed with
wrestling, stinking, sweaty bodies. Rawne couldn’t see more than a few metres in any direction. He fired his
laspistol, and slashed out with his warknife.
Feygor, soaked in blood, appeared alongside him, and together they smashed a little way into the khaki bodies
bottled in the trench. They were treading over the wounded and the dead of both sides alike. Melwid was with them,
and, briefly, Caffran and Leyr.
“Crush them against the traverse!” Rawne shouted. “Where’s Neskon? Where the feth is Neskon?”
The squad’s flame trooper was nowhere to be seen. Nothing was anywhere to be seen, except the churning,
stabbing figures of the enemy.
Then a pistol banged, its noise muffled by the close-packed bodies. Rawne saw Melwid fall, clutching his belly.
He felt a dull ache in his own midriff. Feygor yelled something and impaled the owner of the pistol on his bayonet.
Rawne fell over. He didn’t mean to, but his legs had gone numb. He slumped sideways and hit his head on the
revetment. Sounds had become dull and distant.
What a fething stupid way to fight a war, Rawne thought.
“A fething stupid what?” said a voice behind him.
He struggled over and looked up. He dearly wished his legs would work. Jessi Banda, the platoon sniper, was
curled into a scrape in the trench wall behind him.
“What?” said Rawne.
“A fething stupid what did you say?” she asked, her voice hoarse.
“Way to fight a war,” he replied. “Did I say that out loud then?”
“More kinda screamed it,” she said.
Someone stood on his legs and he yelped. Banda reached down and dragged him up into her scrape, holding him
tightly so he wouldn’t slip back into the base of the trench.
“You’ll be okay,” Banda said.
“Of course!” Rawne snapped. He paused. “Why?”
She didn’t reply. He looked down and saw the blood soaking his lower tunic and his breeches. He saw how limp
and lifeless his legs were.
“Oh feth!” he barked. That wasn’t right. Not right at all.
He turned his head, angry now, and looked at Banda. “Why the feth aren’t you fighting, woman? I thought you
females were meant to be tough!”
“Oh, I’d love to,” she said. A shell went off overhead, and Rawne flinched into her. When he did, it made her
cough. She aspirated blood out over her chin.
“Not today though, I think,” she said.
“Feth! Where are you hit?”
“Worry about yourself, not me,” she answered.
“Banda! Trooper Banda! Where are you hit?”
She didn’t reply. She’d passed out. Rawne found the broken chunk of Shadik bayonet still sticking out of her rib
cage.
Banda was so limp, she nearly toppled into the fire trench. Rawne clawed onto her and held her in place, helpless
himself, trying to stop the both of them getting trampled in the vicious, endless welter of close combat seething along
the trench.
“Medic! Medic!” he cried. No one was listening. Her head nodded down. Rawne tried to support her. “You’ll be
okay,” he told her. “I fething order you to be okay…”
Head low, Colm Corbec scurried down the zig-zag defence trench that joined his dugout to the main front facing of
295. The fury of the long range Shadik artillery was still smashing up the day, but it seemed eerily still in his part of
the line. There was nobody coming at them.
He came up along the step, patting Surch, Orrin, Irvinn and Cown reassuringly on their shoulders as he came by.
Each one was crouched at the parapet with his gun slotted into a loophole or bracket.
Corbec dropped in beside Muril. She was training her long-las back and forth, her eye pressed to the rubber
gusset of her scope.
“Care to guess where the feth the enemy is today?” he asked.
She chuckled. That dirty laugh he liked so much.
They don’t seem to be interested in us, chief.
“You making anything?” he wondered.
Muril shook her head. “I thought I saw a wire-cutting party out there at the fifty-metre mark a few minutes ago. But
it wasn’t. Just bodies on the wire, stirred by the blasts. Nothing else.”
“May I?” he asked. She slid her long-las out of the loop and passed it to him. He set it to his shoulder and rose
slowly to the top of the parapet.
“Chief!” she hissed.
He knew he was taking a risk, but this total lack of activity was driving him spare. Corbec peered into the scope,
adjusting the setting ring, waiting a second as the optic scanner read his retina and automatically recalibrated for his
eyesight.
There was nothing out front but mud, wire tangles, twisted piquets, craters and streams of white and grey smoke
driven almost horizontal by the crosswind.
He looked to his right. Just five hundred metres south, at 294 and 293, he could see a hellish trenchfight tearing
through the positions occupied by Rawne and Domor. Swarms of khaki-clad troopers were pushing up from the mire
and assaulting the main line. To his left, again no more than half a kilometre away, the defences held by their
Krassian allies were swamped with raiders. Corbec could hear the frantic crackle of small-arms and the bang of
grenades.
He dropped back down. “This is fething… peculiar,” he said, passing the sniper weapon back to Muril with a
grateful nod. “Why the feth aren’t they coming at us?”
“They know the great Colonel Corbec is here and they don’t want to risk it?” Muril suggested.
“You’re a sweet girl, and obviously correct, but there has to be more than that.”
Muril deftly calibrated her gunsight back to her own requirements and sat back on the step, straightening her right
leg and flexing it. Maintaining the firing crouch clearly caused her discomfort in her freshly rebuilt pelvis.
“Maybe put yourself in their place?” she said.
“Like what?”
“If you were ordered to take this line, what would you do?”
“I’d attack under the barrage,” he said simply. “And go for the weakest point,” said Cown from his place behind
Muril. “Well, feth… yes!” Corbec said.
He jumped off the step and planted a kiss on Muril’s dirty brow. “Thank you for your suggestion!” he declared.
She was nonplussed. Then he put a smacker on Cown’s forehead too. “And thank you for your insight!”
“What, chief?”
“Imagine! You’re going for a line. Frontal assault. But before you get there, the units either side of you break
through into their areas. Why lose men pressing home at an unbroken line? Any field commander worth his water
would divert towards one of the holes already kicked in. You can bet the bastards intended for us are in support at
294 or 296 right now. Text book. Secure and hold and then hit us from the sides, along the trench. Vox-man!”
Rerval ran up. “Sir?”
“We got links again yet?”
“No sir.”
“Okay… here’s what we do. Every second man, stand down from the step. Those still on station, hold and stay
vigilant. Irvinn, you’ve got fire command here on the step. First sign of action, set up will-fire response and blow
your fething whistle.”
“Yes, chief.”
“The rest split into two groups. Where’s Bewl?”
“Chief?”
“Take half. Move south. Support Domor’s mob. Hold the trench lengthways.”
Bewl nodded, and moved off to communicate the instruction to the troops along the south end of the line section.
“The rest with me,” Corbec said.
The rest were Rerval, Cown, Mkvenner, Sillo, Veddekin and Ponore. Detowine, two platoon’s new flamer man made
the cut too, but Corbec sent him back to the step. If an assault did come late, he’d need the flamer on the line, along
with Surch and Loell’s .30 support.
Corbec double-timed the six men up along the trench, moving north. Every Ghost still on the firestep wished them
the God-Emperor’s grace as they went by.
The attack had been going on for seventeen minutes according to Corbec’s timepiece. The smoke and steam kicked
up by the immense barrage had now become so chronic, someone, presumably in the support lines, had started to fire
off starshells to light the field. The flares served no good purpose except to turn everything into a white haze.
Corbec’s team ran on, pausing and flinching every few metres as yet another shell went in over them, shook the
ground, and anointed them with a rain of loose earth. By the time they reached the armoured traverse that marked the
edge of station 295, Corbec realised he was out of breath.
“You okay, chief?” Mkvenner asked him quietly, so the others couldn’t hear.
“My bones are too fething old, son, and they’ve seen too much war.” Corbec paused a moment and coughed. He’d
always led from the front, and that had cost him. He’d lost the little finger of his left hand at Voltis City. That had
been the start of it. The start of the tally. Menazoid had hurt him hard. Hagia worse. On Phantine, he’d been lucky to
come out alive. Deep wounds to the body and leg, taken during the Cirenholm feth-for-all, followed up with a
nosocomial dose of blood-poisoning.
It was a wonder he wasn’t made up of augmetic prosthetics.
It was a wonder his luck had lasted this long.
A Verghastite trooper named Androby occupied the last slot before the traverse.
“Lot of noise, these last few minutes,” he reported. “Not much to see.” He’d been using a battered artillery scope
borrowed from the mortar teams to keep a watch round the blind end of the traverse.
“Hold here, and stand ready to relay an alarm shout back down the line,” Corbec told him.
They moved around the traverse. For the second time in a week, Mkvenner was advancing around a defencedivide
into what could well be an enemy-stormed trench. Corbec knew that. He’d heard Mkoll’s debrief about the
fight at station 143.
Mkvenner didn’t show any nerves at all. He was quiet, expressionless, his camo-cape draped over him. He led the
way with his lasrifle up against his shoulder so that everywhere he looked, his gun pointed. He was so silent Corbec
couldn’t tell he was there unless he could see him.
Corbec followed him, laspistol in one hand and a grenade in the other. The pin was already out and Corbec was
holding the spoon tightly in place with his big, hairy fist.
Behind Corbec were Sillo and Cown. Both had rifles with warknives fixed. Sillo had been a dye-cutter on
Verghast, and he was quick and dependable. Cown, good old Cown, was one of the Tanith die-hards, who’d been at
the front of just about everything since the awful day they’d first shipped out. He was still getting used to the
augmetic bicep and collarbone he’d won at Cirenholm.
To their rear came Ponore and Veddekin, both Verghastites. Ponore was a young, lank prematurely bald fellow
who complained incessantly, and Corbec didn’t like him much. Veddekin was taller, buck-toothed and younger. Both
of them knew how to use a lasgun, and both had seen action, most particularly on Phantine. Corbec wondered if
either of them had killed yet. He didn’t know, and it was too late to ask.
Rerval brought up the back. He’d left his vox-set with Androby, and carried an extra bag of field dressings.
Corbec knew Rerval was a solid fighter. It was easy to forget the war-skills of the vox-troopers. Corbec hoped
Raglon would change that conception now he’d been promoted from vox ops to platoon leader. Besides his rifle,
Rerval carried a Pharos-pattern flare pistol so they could signal back if things started to cook.
The trench seemed empty. The light was bad and the air was misty with ordnance fumes. Corbec could smell wet
soil, promethium, the raw stink of the untreated timber used for the duckboards.
This section of fire trench ran for ten metres, curving slightly north-west, and ended in another solid traverse.
There was an opening in the back wall four metres in that went through to a gun-den. Mkvenner checked it, and
reported it was empty. A pneumo-mortar and shells, but no gunners.
“This is gakking w—” Ponore began.
Mkvenner put a finger to his lips and the Verghastite shut up.
They crocodiled along, squad members hugging alternate walls.
Here was a discarded lasrifle. Here, the broken haft of an entrenching tool. Items of personal kit were visible in
the scrapes. Musette bags, picts of loved ones, igniters and smokes, respirator masks, vacuum-packed ration bricks,
bed rolls, balled-up woollen vests.
Like they’d left in a hurry, Corbec thought.
They reached the second traverse. Mkvenner held up a hand. He pointed to the flakboarded back wall of the
trench. There was a clotted splatter of blood, matted with strands of hair.
Mkvenner made a signal, one hand over the other, and dropped onto his belly. Corbec stepped aside and let Cown
through. Cown and Mkvenner edged round the end of the sturdy earthwork divide, Mkvenner on his front, Cown
crouched over him so that two lasguns, stacked, would greet whatever was round there.
“Ahead,” Cown whispered.
Corbec led the others around.
The next fire-bay was empty too, of the living at least.
Fresh corpses virtually filled the trench bottom. Slaughtered Krassian troopers, dead Shadik raiders, all twisted
and wrapped under and over each other in an orgiastic celebration of feral murder. Smoke plumes drifted out from
some las-punctures where uniform fabric had started to burn. Fountains of blood had splashed up the wall and step in
some places. In others, grenades had rendered bodies down into abattoir chunks, and scorched the earth walls black
with soot. Where they stepped, the duckboards sank and bright pools of blood welled up through the slats.
The smell was truly nauseating. Blood, cordite, offal, sweat, fyceline, faeces.
All the Ghosts had seen war before, to a greater or lesser extent, but this sight stung them. So many bodies, packed
in so tight, into such a Hide space.
“Gak…” said Ponore.
“Shut up,” Corbec told him. He tried to walk forward, but there was nowhere except bodies to step on. Corpses
groaned and sighed, burped and farted as he put his weight on them, squeezing lungs and guts. He was trying to make
his way to the mouth of the communications trench that opened into this strand of fire trench halfway along.
It was hard balancing on the dead. Corbec reached his hands out to brace himself against the sides of the
trenchway. He spat a disgusted curse as his weight caused a little geyser of blood to squirt from a Krassian’s chest
wound.
Veddekin suddenly swivelled, and the movement startled Corbec. Veddekin’s lasrifle banged and a bright bolt of
energy whickered across the width of the trench and punched through the face of a Shadik raider who had just
appeared at the parapet.
The raider jerked with whiplash and then toppled head first onto the firestep before falling over, back and feet
first, into the bottom of the defence. Corbec had jumped so much at the shot he’d lost his footing and fallen over
amongst the heaped dead.
“Sharp eyes,” Mkvenner growled in approval to Veddekin. The scout leapt onto the step, and swung his weapon
up, shooting dead the next two Shadik who loomed up at the parapet.
The Ghosts rushed the step then, joining Mkvenner and firing down into the smoke-thickened reaches of no-man’s
land at the assault party that was trying to get in.
“Gak! There’s too many of them!” Ponore yelled.
“Aim. Fire. Repeat,” Mkvenner urged.
Corbec looked up at the backs of his boys on the step and struggled to rise out of the warm layers of bodies. He
got his left hand on a timber support and—
He froze. The grenade spoon tumbled from his clawing hand.
He’d dropped the fething bomb.
He looked down, looked down into twisted limbs and staring faces and spools of steaming guts. It was down there
somewhere.
If he cried out a warning, he knew his squad would break and the assaulters would be all over them. If he didn’t
he and most likely two or three of his team would be killed.
“Sacred feth!” Corbec howled, lunging his hand down into the sticky mess of burst viscera, exposed bone and
burnt fabric beneath him. He groped for the grenade. Of all the stupid fething ways of dying. How long had the fuse
been set to? Ten seconds? Fifteen?
How long had he been scrabbling for it?
His fingers closed on the bomb. It felt red-hot, toxic, and he wanted to let it go.
But he daren’t. He yanked it up and threw it. Threw it as hard as his big, tired, old arm could manage. Threw it up
and out hoping it would fly all the way to the Republic of Shadik and never come back. Threw it as desperately as
he’d thrown the sewn-leather batter-balls that had come his way across the rec-field at Pryze County Ground when
he’d been just eleven and detesting his forced participation in the County Scholam Tournament.
He’d hated batter-ball. He’d never been able to catch. Never been able to field. He’d been doomed, as a kid, to
be the last boy picked for teams.
“Feth!” he screamed, and threw. Threw hard. The best throw of his life.
The hurtling bomb went off in the air, three metres up, as it spun into no-man’s land. Shrapnel from the airburst
caught five of the raiders at the heart of the attacking platoon.
They broke and fell back, shots from Mkvenner, Cown, Veddekin and Rerval punishing them further. Veddekin hit
one in the back as he ran away and ignited the poor bastard’s ammo web. The retreating figure caught fire in a flash
and carried on running, burning, jolting erratically over shell holes and mud-ridges until he dropped out of sight.
“Are we clear?” Corbec asked, on his feet again. His voice was hoarse with stress. He prayed to every pantheon
imaginable that no one had noticed how fething close he’d come to screwing up. Especially Mkvenner. Corbec was
meant to be top dog. Mkvenner would never have screwed up like that, not in a million years. And Mkvenner would
most certainly have picked Corbec last for his ball team. Old and tired and slow, Colm Corbec, old and tired and
slow.
“We’re clear,” said Cown.
“Should we stay here?” asked Rerval.
“They won’t come back any time soon if they think the line’s secure,” said Mkvenner, wisely.
Corbec beckoned them after him and advanced up the jink-cut communications trench. He led the way now, his
officer’s pistol holstered and his rifle pulled off his back. He’d fixed his bayonet.
There were more bodies up the communications cut, Krassians most of them, distinguished by their coppercoloured
coats and grey helmets. Rerval recognised a face or two from Ouranberg. Poor fething bastards. They’d
fought to hold every miserable centimetre of this arbitrary hole in the ground. The way some of them had died
beggared belief. The suffering, the indignity…
They were four zags down when Corbec stopped them. Small-arms fire was whizzing back and forth along the
next angled stretch.
“Way I see it,” Corbec told them quietly, “the enemy got in and overran the line, killing the Krassys or driving
them back up the communications. Probably lost a lot themselves on the way. So we’re coming in behind them. Let’s
make it count.”
The Ghosts nodded and checked weapons.
“Three abreast,” Corbec instructed. “Me, Ven and Veddey. There’s no more room than that. Sillo, Cown, get some
tube bombs ready and lob them over the divide as we go. Lob them far —you hear me, you fethers?”
They did.
“And get in behind us,” Corbec said to Ponore and Rerval. “If we go down, fill our spots. Cown, Sillo, you too,
after them. Let’s show them how it’s done.”
On Corbec’s signal, they came round the zag-end and onto the backs of a pack of Shadik raiders clustered in at the
next turn. Some of the enemy troopers began to turn as the first las-rounds sliced into them.
“First-and-Only!” Corbec yelled, firing on full auto, smacking las-shots into khaki backs.
Veddekin fell back, his weapon jammed.
Rerval pushed past him, and maintained the tight line. Tube-charges wobbled through the air above them, hurled
by Sillo and Cown from behind the trench turn. The blasts filled the narrow defile.
“Straight silver!” Corbec shouted, and, without further warning, charged the enemy. He’d charged because he’d
spotted that their angle wasn’t secure. Not by a long way. A secondary trench, probably a munitions track, intersected
with their stretch from the right on a dog-leg. If there were more Shadik up there…
There were.
Corbec crunched his bayonet into the ribs of one of the Shadik, then kicked the man off the blade as he turned to
shoot another raider behind the first. Somehow the first Shadik managed to wrench Corbec’s blade off his gun as he
went down. As a third came in, swinging a trench club with an iron head, Corbec speared him with his lasrifle
anyway. For all he bemoaned his age and diminishing strength, Corbec was still one of the biggest, strongest men in
the First. Bayonet or no bayonet, you didn’t get up again if Colm Corbec put his weight behind the steel muzzle of a
lasgun and rammed it into your sternum.
Now Corbec had an angle into the secondary trench. It was narrow and well-boarded, and sloped away from him
downhill in a slight incline. He dropped to his knees and fired down it. His shots hit two of the enemy bunched up
fifteen metres away, then a third. A fourth returned fire with a compact sub-autogun, a little bull-nosed slugger with a
hooked magazine obviously designed with trench-war in mind.
The burst of small-calibre bullets ripped into the support palings of the trench gabion behind Corbec, showering
out splinters. Corbec fired twice, unruffled, and knocked the shooter off his feet and sideways into the revetment.
The man slithered down and rolled over.
There were other figures deeper in the secondary trench, veiled by the shadows and the smoke. Corbec fired on
them a couple more times, and then ducked back into cover as a ball bomb landed near the mouth of the secondary
and threw mud and broken duckboards into the air.
Corbec took stock. He, Mkvenner and Rerval were on one side of the secondary’s opening, the rest still back at
the start of the zag. Cown tried to dart across to them, but jerked back when rifle rounds and what seemed to be
buckshot came stinging up the munitions track.
Corbec looked up the zag. His squad had cleared out the raiders right up to the next rum, about ten metres away.
“Check ahead,” he told Mkvenner. “I’m hoping there’s Krassians round that bend. Don’t let ’em shoot you.”
Mkvenner nodded and grinned. He got to the end and peered round. Serious las-fire made him dip back at once.
“Guard! We’re Guard!” he hollered. More las-shots. The Krassians, a new outfit with comparatively Hide
battlefield experience, had taken a pounding in the last forty-five minutes. They were spooked and angry and
shooting at anything.
Rerval joined Mkvenner.
“They’re not taking the chance we’re not Shadik,” Mkvenner said.
“We better get their attention,” Rerval said. He pulled out his flare pistol, broke it open, and began sorting through
his satchel of smoke and colour pellets. “What’s today’s recognition colour?” he asked.
“Blue,” said Mkvenner. He knew full well Rerval knew that. Rerval was vox-ops, up there with Beltayn and
Rafflan as one of the best signals specialists in the regiment. The question had been Rerval’s way of stress
management. A coping strategy. A chance to find out what Mkvenner thought of the idea without actually asking it.
“Blue. Right” said Rerval. He slid a colour-coded cartridge into the flare pistol, snapped it shut, cocked it, and
said, “Look away.”
They both averted their eyes. Rerval fired the signal gun round the corner of the zag so that the flare embedded
itself in the muddy wall beyond. It began to burn with phosphorescent white light, tinged blue by the smoke it was
spilling out. The light was fierce and harsh. It threw off long, inky shadows and made everything look cold. The lasfire
stopped.
“Guard! We’re Guard here!” Mkvenner tried again. “You Krassian up there?”
A pause. An answering shout.
“Krassian?” Mkvenner called again.
“Aye! What’s the day code?”
“Alpha blue pentacost!” Rerval called.
“Blue eleven salutant!” came the correct answer.
“I’m coming out,” called Mkvenner. “Hold fire!”
He walked slowly into a trench still lit by the brilliant glare of the fizzling signal round. Blue smoke wafted
around him. It was a theatrical entrance, and Rerval was rather proud of it.
Krassian troopers came down the trench to meet them. Their weapons were still raised, and they all looked edgy
and scared. Young, a lot of them. Faces white against the copper worsted of their coats.
“Where the hell did you come from?” asked the officer in charge.
“The nalwoods west of Attica,” replied Mkvenner with typical inscrutability. The officer looked puzzled.
“We’re Tanith First-and-Only,” said Rerval. “We pushed in from the south.”
“Tanith?” echoed the officer. Two or three of his younger men had tears in their eyes. Relief, Mkvenner presumed.
“They hit us bad, so bad,” said the officer. “Are they gone? Did you get them?”
“Not yet,” said Mkvenner.
Fifteen metres back around the zag, Corbec was negotiating the clearance of the secondary trench.
Along with Cown, Veddekin and Ponore, he’d been squirting off shots down the length of it on a regular basis, but
the response was firm. The worst part of it was that at least one of the raiders had a shotgun, probably a sawn-off, an
ideal weapon for trench fights. Ducking in and risking a bullet was one thing, and Murten.
Feygor would probably give you odds on it. But a shotgun blanketed the space.
Sillo had found that out. Ponore had dragged him back from the junction and dressed his wound, but Corbec knew
a scatter-shot hit like that was gangrene waiting to happen, even if the enemy hadn’t treated their lead with bacterials
as he’d known to be the tactics amongst the arch-enemy.
Sillo had been hit in the left thigh with such force it had shredded his trouser-leg off, broken his belt, and gouged
the flesh so deeply Corbec had seen yellow fat and bone. Sillo had screamed, passed out, then woken again
screaming. He shut up when Ponore stuck him in the buttock with a one-shot disposable full of morphosia.
“Might be another way round,” Veddekin suggested, his back to the wall by the junction.
“Might be. Who knows?” Corbec grumbled. “If we had a fething map…”
He did have a fething map. All XOs had been given one when they checked in at 55th sector HQ on their way up
the line. The map was deficient in three particulars. First, it showed only the immediate locale of the XO’s posting,
which meant Corbec’s finished at station 295. Second, it showed no minor detail of supply trenches, communication
lines, munition tracks or ops centres, because Aexe Alliance Command feared that a map showing such detail would
be too sensitive to risk it being captured. So even if Corbec had possessed a map of 296 and northwards, it wouldn’t
have shown him this track anyway.
Third, perhaps most importantly, it looked like it had been made by a hallucinating, ink-dipped cockroach that had
been allowed to run across a piece of used latrine paper.
“We could go over the top,” Cown said, thinking aloud. “That’s what the scouts did at 143 the other night.”
Well, they were fething scouts, the best of our best, half a century younger than me and tough enough to crack
nalnuts in their armpits, Corbec wanted to say. But he bit it back. Cown was only trying to help.
“I’d wager they’re expecting that, pal,” Corbec said. He picked up a Shadik helmet, hung it on the nose of his las
and hefted it up above the revet.
He only had to wiggle it for a second before a rifle round cracked it and sent it spinning away into the air.
Cown smiled at Corbec feebly, and shrugged.
Ponore was looking around. “Holy gak!” he began. “We’re lucky we didn’t go up like bonfires when we started
fire-fighting down this!”
More complaints. Corbec wasn’t really interested in what Ponore had to say anymore. He’d march over and slap
him quiet if it wasn’t for fact he’d have to get in line of shot to do it.
Ponore wouldn’t shut up. He’d crossed to the other side of the zag and yanked up a tarpaulin. As was the case with
many supply trenches, funk-holes had been dug out of the sides to make space for storage and then veiled with canvas
curtains. Ponore was revealing stacked bags of dressings, tins of vegetable soup, muslin bags of candles, and three
or four drums of lamp oil.
“If a shot had hit this,” Ponore moaned, “whoomff! That’d been us.”
Corbec suddenly grinned. “Ponore?”
“Yes sir, chief?”
“I could kiss you.”
“He does that,” Cown warned earnestly. “Get those drums out. Careful, mind.” Veddekin and Ponore manhandled
the first one up to the junction.
Corbec peered around the corner again. He saw what he’d seen the first time he’d looked down the munitions
track. Back then, he’d been too busy killing Shadik to pay attention.
The secondary trench sloped away from them. Not much, barely, in fact. But enough. That’s why the duckboarding
was good. Water drained away down this side trench.
“What now?” asked Veddekin.
“We need a tube or something,” Corbec improvised. “Cown? There must be a syphon or a funnel or something in
there.”
Cown searched the funk hole store, cursing every time the curtain fell back, blocking him in darkness. Ponore went
over and held the tarp back for him. Cown emerged with a tin jug.
“What about this?”
“Toss it over.”
Cown threw the jug across the junction and Corbec caught it by the handle. Four or five shots whined up the
secondary at the movement.
Corbec recovered his warknife from the ribs of the raider who’d somehow managed to rip it off. He mumbled an
apology to the knife for what he was about to do.
It took him about a minute of chopping and levering to bend out the base of the jug and cut it lengthways. He ended
up bracing it against a trench post and ripping the curled-away half off by hand.
He’d made a little trough. Not the best trough in the world, but a little trough all the same, with a spout end and
everything. His machinesmith father would have been proud.
He flipped it back to Cown. More shots.
“Dig it into the earth there,” he instructed. “No, at the corner so the spout hangs over the edge. That’s it. Keep the
back end in cover. That’s the lad. Dig it in if you have to. Make it stable.”
Cown raked the earth away with the head of his nine seventy and made the trough stable.
“Fine and lovely,” approved Corbec. “Now start pouring the oil down it.”
Ponore unplugged the first drum and then tipped it over with Veddekin’s help. Clear, sweet-smelling lamp oil
glugged out, swirling down the makeshift trough. It began to run down the secondary, gurgling under the duckboards.
“And the rest,” urged Corbec, as Cown and Ponore rolled the first drum away, empty, and Veddekin tipped the
second. Corbec realised he was fidgeting from foot to foot. He so wanted to be on the other side of the junction,
mucking in with the work, but he could only stand and issue instructions.
A sudden thought hit him. An epiphany. That’s what it was called. He’d heard Captain Daur talk about epiphanies.
Daur was an educated lad. He understood these fine, subtle things.
A moment of unexpected clarity. That’s what Corbec believed it to mean. A sudden revelatory instant of
comprehension.
He should never have become an officer. Never. Not even a sergeant, let alone XO of the Tanith regiment. Sure, he
had the presence and the charisma, so he was told. He was a personality, and the men rallied round him. That was
what Gaunt had seen in him, first time they’d met. Must’ve been. And Corbec was happy to serve.
But there it was. Gaunt had made him colonel. He’d not asked for it. He’d not chased for it. He wasn’t a career
man, like Daur or, Emperor protect them all, Rawne. He had no ambition.
What was it they all said about him? That compliment? He led from the front. Just so. He was never happier than
when he was at the very workface of fighting, confronting the practicals.
He was the big, strong son of a machinesmith from County Pryze. He should have been a trooper, a dog-grunt,
fething well mucking in. Mucking in over there, in fact. Not standing this side of the junction, yakking out orders.
Corbec thought about that for a moment, watching the oil swirl away down the secondary.
“Third drum going in now!” Cown hissed. “Is this going to work?”
“Let’s find out,” Corbec grinned. He looked up-zag to the turn where Mkvenner and Rerval were talking with a
bunch of bewildered-looking Krassians.
“Rerval! Over here, son!”
The vox trooper hurried down to Corbec.
“Gimme your flare gun. What bums best?”
“Sir?” Rerval said, handing over the fat-nosed signal gun. Corbec cracked it open.
“Your flares, Rerval. Which one bums best?”
Rerval searched in his bag. “Red, I guess, chief. It’s got the biggest powder charge. But we’re only supposed to
thump one of them out in predicaments. It’s the emergency signal.”
“Give me one. If this works, I’m sure as fething certain our Shadik friends yonder will consider this a
predicament, and no mistake.”
Rerval shrugged and handed Corbec a red-tabbed cartridge. Corbec slotted it into the gun and closed the springloaded
mechanism. “Clear?” he asked Cown.
The Ghosts on the other side had rolled the last drum away. Cown nodded.
“Duck and cover,” Corbec told them. “Fire in the hole!” He pointed the flare pistol down the secondary and
squeezed the trigger. Nothing happened.
“What the feth is wrong with this piece of crap?” he snarled, bringing his hand back in.
“There’s a safety lock,” said Rerval, fussing and trying to be helpful. “Just there. No, the lever there by your
thumb. Uh huh.”
“Well, I knew that,” said Corbec and fired the flare down the munitions track.
Superheated, glowing like a laser torpedo, it ricocheted off the right-hand wall, tumbled left, bounced off a druber
post and went spinning away towards the cowering Shadik raiders, kicking off streams of bright red smoke.
Corbec pulled Rerval back against the side wall of the zag.
There was a distant yell. A cramp of ignition. Then forty metres of the secondary trench went off like a earner’s
kiss. Fire leapt up into the sky, clearing the tops of the walls. Thick, intense, sweet-smelling like the wick-burn of the
little lamps they’d given them.
Then there was another smell. A terrible smell. Cooking fat and meat.
“Good job,” Corbec told his boys, wincing into the bright flame light. “Good fething job.”
The foot assault on 292 came at precisely sixteen minutes after the start of the bombardment. It came from the
northeast, the Shadik using the big, rusting tube of the drain outfall as cover. Just like the note had said.
Not a single raider made it closer to the parapet than fifteen metres. Agun Soric had clustered his rifles around the
outfall, and they blazed at the advancing khaki.
Trooper Kazel reckoned they slaughtered at least fifty, maybe sixty even. It was hard to tell. Five platoon had
certainly blown them back to wherever they’d come from.
Soric missed Doyl. Doyl had been his platoon’s scout. He’d died on the special mission at Ouranberg. Doyl
would have been counting. Doyl would have known.
Soric stood on the step and closed his good eye. He’d always refused a patch or an implant for the eye he’d lost at
Vervunhive. He wore the rouched scar with some defiance. It made him look as if he was perpetually winking.
He closed his eye and waited. He saw they’d killed at least seventy-six raiders, a multi-platoon force. Kazel had
been underestimating.
Sometimes, Soric saw better with his good eye closed. It was just one of those things. He didn’t think much of it.
His eye was dead, and so he reckoned it saw things only the dead could see. It had a vantage his good eye didn’t.
That had been particularly the case since Cirenholm. He’d been badly wounded there. Recovering, he’d had such
strange dreams.
Soric knew he should’ve kept quiet about them, but secrecy wasn’t his way. He’d talked about the dreams, and
now Gaunt and Dorden and that sweet girl Ana Curth regarded him with mistrust. He should never have told them
about his great-grandmother.
Grandam had possessed the sight. Some called her a witch. So what? It wasn’t like she was a psyker, for gak’s
sake! Grandam had just been able to… to see stuff others didn’t. Now Agun could, being the seventh son of a seventh
son, as Grandam had always assured him.
It hadn’t always been that way. Not until Cirenholm. Passage so close under death’s black wing and out the other
side, that marked a man. That woke him up. That opened his senses.
Opened his eyes.
The handwritten note though, that was another thing altogether. Soric felt his heart skip as he thought about that.
How had he known that? How had he written it to himself?
“Stand down,” he told his men, and the word was passed along. There’d be no more Shadik at 292 today.
Soric realised he knew that for a fact. Why was that?
He felt scared, really scared suddenly. He limped back to his dugout, ignoring the calls and questions of his men.
“Vivvo?”
“Boss?”
“Get them settled,” he said and dropped the gas curtain after himself.
In the dim lamp-light, he sat down at the little raw-wood table. The brass message shell was sitting there, on end,
casting a little blunt shadow. There was no sign of the scrap of blue paper.
Soric breathed slowly, clutching the edge of the table tightly with his gnarled hands. A drink. That might help.
He got up, and waddled his stiff leg over to the shelf. Scope, ammo clips, candles… “spare water bottle”.
Gaunt had said he’d have men shot for drinking on duty. Except in special cases.
This was a special case.
Soric unstoppered the flask with hands that were quaking more than he’d have liked them to. He took a slug of
sacra. Good old Bragg had supplied him with the stuff. Soric had developed a taste for the Tanith liquor. Who’d get
him sacra now Bragg was gone?
The blue-paper despatch pad lay on the shelf beside the flask. Soric thought about picking it up, then took another
swig instead. The grain alcohol burned in his belly. He felt better. He looked at the pad again.
The first two sheets were missing.
Soric glanced over at the table. The brass message shell sat there, ominous.
“Go away!” he said.
“Uh, I did knock,” said the shell.
But it wasn’t the shell. It was Commissar Hark.
The commissar peered in at Soric, holding the gas curtain back.
“Sergeant?”
“Oh, oh! Come in.”
Hark entered.
Soric felt hugely exposed. He tried to keep his mouth clamped shut so he wouldn’t exude the smell of liquor.
Gaunt might have forgiven him. Hark was a different matter. Hark was a commissar, unqualified, unalloyed.
“Everything all right?” Hark asked. He seemed suspicious.
“Fine, fine,” said Soric, breathing through his nose.
Hark looked at him. “You could relax, sergeant.”
Mouth clamped shut Soric grinned and shrugged.
Hark sat down on the stool, removing his cap. “Good work today, sergeant. Excellent in fact. How did you guess
the Shadik’s approach route?”
Soric shrugged again.
“Lucky, huh?” Hark nodded. “Shrewd is a better word. You’re very shrewd. You know your stuff, Agun. Can I call
you Agun? It doesn’t offend your sense of rank?”
“Not at all, sir,” Soric muttered, trying not breathe as he spoke.
“The bombardment’s stopped,” Hark said. Soric realised he hadn’t noticed.
“We’ve held them off for the most part,” Hark added. “Tough stuff around 293 and 294, and also with Criid, Obel
and Theiss. And Maro’s dead.”
“Shit, no!” said Soric, despite himself.
“Yeah, it’s too bad. Good soldier. But his section took seventy per cent losses. Shells caught them hard. Lasko,
Fewtin, Bisroya, Mkdil. All gone. Not you, though, eh?”
“Sir.”
Hark gestured expansively. “I don’t have the full picture yet, but I’m pretty sure your platoon gave the best today,
unit for unit. A hell of a job, Agun. Good work. Smart to pick up on their route of attack. I’m impressed.”
“Thank you, sir.”
“I’ll be commending your unit to Gaunt. Any one you want to pick out?”
“I’ll… Vivvo and Kazel.”
Hark nodded. “I tell you what you could do now.”
“Sir?”
“I don’t know about you, Agun, but I’m shaking fit to drop. Man like you must have some hard stuff hereabouts.”
“Oh,” said Soric. He rattled round on the shelf. “Forgive my inhospitality, commissar.”
He poured sacra into two of the least chipped shot glasses cluttering his shelf and handed one to Hark.
“Excellent. Knew I could count on a trusty Vervunhiver like you.”
Hark knocked back the shot. Soric sipped his own. He refilled Hark’s glass and breathed more naturally.
Hark finished the second shot. “Takes a while, but that Tanith stuff is good, isn’t it?”
“Becoming a favourite, sir,” said Soric.
“You’ll have to tell me how you did it some time,” said Hark.
“Did what, sir?”
“Outguessed the Shadik. Good work, though. Excellent. The regiment is proud of you.” Hark got up.
“I have to get down the line now. Rawne’s been hit. His section is a mess.”
“Hit bad?”
“I’m going to find out. Again, good work, Agun. My compliments to your boys.”
Hark pulled back the gas curtain to leave.
“Thanks for the drink,” he added, and disappeared.
Soric sat down hard as soon as the commissar had gone. He played with his shot glass, and then finished the
dregs.
Vivvo stuck his head through the curtain.
“Boss? Do you w—”
“Go away,” said Soric.
“Yes, boss.”
Alone, Soric picked up the message shell and unscrewed the top. He had to thump the base of the canister twice to
get the fold of blue paper out. The message was written in his own handwriting, just like before. It said: “Don’t
drink. Commissar Hark is coming.”
FIVE
SILVER, RED AND BLACK
“Waiting is crap. It’s crap for a hungry man in a canteen line, it’s shit for a groom at his wedding supper, and it’s
double triple quadrilateral crap for a soldier boy like yours truly.”
—Colm Corbec, colonel
It had been a bad day at the front. The Tanith First reserves at Rhonforq could tell that just from the false dusk caused
by the wall of black smoke rising in the distance. They waited for news, hoping for good, steeled for bad.
Gaunt had left Captain Ban Daur in command of the First’s reserve section, a full two-thirds of the regiment’s
strength, and Daur fretted miserably throughout the afternoon. Every ten, twenty minutes he wandered outside and
watched the flickering lights and puffing smogs of the distant battle. At first, the thump of the shells had been like the
thunder of a distant storm; muffled, remote, lagging behind the flashes. Then the sound had become continuous,
without break or breath or pause. A constant rumble, as if the earth was slowly faulting and tearing. Sometimes, the
ground shook, even this far away.
Once in a while, there came a blast roar so loud and plangent that it rose out of the rumble. Daur couldn’t work out
if these noises came from shells that had landed closer to his position, or bigger shells landing with the rest. They’d
been told the enemy had brought up some big-reach, huge calibre weapons. All the men were talking about “supersiege”
guns.
Daur tried to occupy himself, but the rumble was too distracting. At around 14.00, he went to eat at one of the
pensions, and got a curious look from the matronly owner when he ordered scrambled eggs. Only when it arrived did
he remember that he’d already taken lunch — scrambled eggs — just an hour before.
He thought of visiting Zweil. The unit’s chaplain was refreshing company sometimes, and good at distracting a
man’s mind with provocative conversation. But he was told that Zweil had gone to the front that morning with Gaunt,
as if he’d known he’d be needed today.
Daur toured the billets instead. The Ghosts had occupied the stableblocks and barns of a pair of farmsteads in the
south of the town, their overspill camped out in a sea of tents pitched in the paddocks behind. The paddocks adjoined
an old tannery occupied by a company of Krassians, and a little vee of derelict shops and outbuildings at the junction
of the two southern roads, which was the billet of a local brigade, the Twelfth Ostlund “Shielders”.
Daur wandered into the muddy yard of one of the stable-blocks. Burone, Bray and Ewler had taken the long, lefthand
bam for their platoons. The men mostly lurked around, dejected in the light rain, like prisoners of war in a
blockhouse pen. Daur saw the coals of burning lho-sticks in the shadows of the high-loft hatches. Under the slope of
a lean-to roof, Polio from seven platoon was trying to teach card tricks to a crowd of onlookers. Polio had been
bodyguard for a noble house back on Verghast, and his nerves were augmented by extravagantly expensive neural
enhancers, so his fingers split and spread the cards faster than the eye could follow. It was a little piece of magic to
watch, and the men around him were captivated. Daur watched for a little while, until Polio had exhausted his
repertoire of tricks and produced three cups and a shell case instead. The audience groaned.
“Who wants a try?” Polio asked, his hands circling the upturned cups in a blur. He caught Daur’s eye and winked.
“You, sir?”
Daur smiled. “You see my rank pins, Trooper Polio? I get those for being smart. No thanks.”
Polio grinned. “Your loss.”
“I don’t think so,” said Daur and wandered on. At the back end of the yard, Haller’s men were kicking a ball
around with some of the Krassians. It was a lively, muddy game. Noa Vadim was running circles around the
Krassians, his squad mates urging him on. Daur was sure they were really shouting and whooping to shut out the
distant growl of the battle.
Daur heard low-level gunfire coming from one of the stable pens and went to investigate. He found Trooper Merrt
practising his aim against old bottles ranged on the crossbeams of the end wall.
Merrt looked up as Daur appeared. “Sorry, sir,” he said. “Just gn… gn… practising. I’ve set it to gn… gn… lowcharge.”
He looked a little shame-faced, though it was hard to tell. Merrt’s jaw and one side of his face were crude
metal implants, poorly disguised by a flesh-coloured mask. Daur knew why he was practising. Merrt practised every
chance he got. A Tanith, he’d been one of the regiment’s original snipers, with a hit rate lower than Larkin’s or
Rilke’s but still impressive. Then, on Monthax, he’d taken a horrific head wound and his aim had gone to hell. Gaunt
had kept him as sniper for a time — too generous a time, according to Hark — but Merrt’s lack of success on
Phantine had finally obliged Gaunt, reluctantly, to reassign him back to a standard trooper role.
Daur knew Merrt hated his loss of status even more than he hated the loss of his face. Merrt practised and
practised, striving to regain his prowess and win back his marksman’s lanyard.
“How’s it going?” Daur asked.
Merrt shrugged. “I’d like to be working with a gn… gn… long-las, but they took it off me and gn… gn… gave it to
some girl,” he said bleakly, indicating the standard-pattern lasrifle he was holding. His speech was distorted by the
rebuilt portions of his head. Merit seemed to gnaw the words out. He stammered a lot, thanks to that ugly
replacement jaw.
“Some of those girls are good shots,” said Daur smoothly. He knew too well a lot of the Tanith resented the
Verghastite volunteers, particularly the females, and especially the females like Banda, Muril and Nessa who
excelled at shooting.
Daur wouldn’t hear them bad-mouthed. They were the Verghastites’ one claim to excellence in the regiment.
Merrt stammered particularly badly, realising he’d spoken out of turn to the senior Verghastite officer. “I didn’t
mean anything gn… gn… by that, sir.”
“I know,” said Daur. There was no real anti-Verghast or misogynistic rancour in Merit. He was just a damaged
man struggling with his own failure.
“Gn… gn… sorry.”
Daur nodded. “You carry on,” he said.
Daur felt wretched as he walked away from the stall. There had been plenty of scorch marks on the end wall, but
precious few broken bottles.
Daur crossed the end of the back paddock, passing the time with a few soldiers there. Then he followed a quaggy
path up onto a bank that ran down through what had once been an orchard, before the men in the billets had felled
most of it for firewood. Arcuda and Raglon were sheltering from the rain by a low wall, their capes pulled up
around them.
Daur knew they were both nervous. Both had been promoted, along with Criid, to platoon command just prior to
Aexe. Both were anticipating their first taste of field command.
But both had reason to be proud, in Daur’s book. Arcuda, a Verghastite with a long, thin doleful face, had proved
himself in the ranks and won his pins. Raglon had made his way to squad command through distinguished service in
company signals. It was odd not to see Raglon with his vox-set. Daur was pleased to find them together; Verghastite
and Tanith, on equal footing, counting on each other.
They greeted him and he squatted down beside them.
“Action at the front,” Daur said.
“We noticed,” said Raglon.
“Chances are, we may move forward early,” Daur added.
Arcuda nodded. “I want to get up there, sir,” he said. “I just want to get in it. Sort of… get it over with. Did you
feel that way on your first command?”
Daur smiled. “My first command was a sentry detail at Hass West, Vervunhive. Very pedestrian,” he said. “I was
nineteen. I didn’t see action for four years. Not until… the War.”
Someone sniggered. Daur looked up and saw Sergeant Meryn leaning over the wall and listening in.
“Something funny, Meryn?”
Meryn shook his head. “No, captain. I’m just always amused the way you Verghasts refer to Vervunhive as ‘The
War’, capital emphasis and all. It was a big do, certainly, and hard as fething bastardy for everyone involved. But it
wasn’t ‘The War’. The War’s what we’re fighting now. We were fighting it before Verghast and we’ll be fighting it
still in years to come.”
Daur got up and faced Meryn. The man was young, one of the youngest Tanith-born officers, several years junior
to Daur. He was trim, compact, good-looking, and had recently taken to cultivating a moustache that made him look
sinister in Daur’s opinion. Meryn had charm, and a fine record, and his brevet-ranking to sergeant as part of
Operation Larisel on Phantine had become a permanent thing. His pins were as new as Arcuda’s and Raglon’s.
“I know there’s war and there’s war, sergeant,” Daur said. “You’ll have to excuse a Verghast his memories.” Daur
deliberately used the word Meryn had used. “Verghast” not “Verghastite”. All the Tanith did that. To them, it was a
contraction. To Verghastites, it was insulting slang. “We know we’re fighting The War now. But you’ll forgive us if
we tend to focus on the fight that saw our home-hive ransacked.”
Meryn shrugged. “And Tanith died. We all have our memories. We all have our wars.”
Daur frowned and looked away, the drizzle splashing off his face. He didn’t like Meryn much. He’d been an
obvious choice for platoon command, some said an overdue choice, but he’d become unpleasantly hard-edged and
cocky. Sometimes, he reminded Daur of Caffran. Both Tanith were of a similar age, a similar build even. But where
Caffran was young and eager and good-natured, Meryn was young and ruthless and arrogant.
Colm Corbec had a private theory about that. The theory was called Major Rawne. According to Corbec, Meryn
had been “a fine, honest lad” for some time until he’d made corporal and, thanks to the vagaries of regimental
structure, fallen under Rawne’s wing. Rawne was Meryn’s mentor now, and Meryn was learning well. The freshfaced
attitude had vanished, and been replaced by a bitter, hostile air. The stain of Rawne’s corrosive influence,
Daur believed. Rawne was grooming Meryn. Unofficially, the rumour was that Meryn had ordered, or performed,
some excessively brutal actions during Operation Larisel. Certainly Larkin and Mkvenner were tight-lipped about
him. Meryn had been zealous to achieve his Larisel mission targets and prove himself for promotion.
Too zealous, maybe.
“So, any word from the line yet?” Meryn asked. Daur wished Meryn would go away so he could spend some time
bolstering Arcuda and Raglon without an audience.
“No,” said Daur “Not yet.”
“If there are casualties, you can figure we’ll be moving up before tonight,” Meryn said.
“If there are casualties…” Daur admitted.
Meryn made a sarcastic gesture at the smoke rising from the front. “There’ll be casualties,” he said.
“You’d wish that, would you?” snapped Daur.
“Not for a moment,” said Meryn, his face turning stony. “But I’m a realist. That’s bad feth up there. ‘The War’, you
know? Someone’s going to get hurt.”
Daur wanted to tell Meryn to go away, but Raglon and Arcuda had got to their feet, shaking the water off their
capes.
“We’re going to check on our units, sir,” said Raglon.
“Get them ready, if and when,” Arcuda added.
“Good idea,” said Daur.
The two novice sergeants walked away down the bank towards the village and the tower of the Chapel St Avigns.
As soon as they were out of earshot, Daur turned on Meryn.
“Do you understand the concept of morale, Meryn?”
Meryn shrugged.
“Those two are on the verge of their first field command. They’re scared. They need building up, not knocking
down.”
“It’s a crime to be realistic now, is it, captain?” Meryn asked, insolently. “This is my first action as sergeant too, if
you’ll recall.”
“You’ve had command, Meryn. At Ouranberg. You did all right there. Too well, maybe.”
“What does that mean?”
“Whatever you like,” said Daur, walking away. He uttered a silent prayer of thanks that within a week or so,
Meryn would be Rawne’s responsibility again.
There was a lot of noise coming from the end sheds of the tannery. Daur pushed his way into a bam space that stank
of sweat and bodies. The place was full of Ghosts and Krassians and a good number of the red-tunicked Ostlunders.
The Ostlunders were from Kottmark, the country that bordered Aexegary to the east. They were a fair-skinned,
hardy breed, generally much taller than the Imperials.
Daur peered through the crowd, trying to establish the source of the commotion.
“Varl,” he sighed to himself. “Why am I surprised?”
Sergeant Varl, head of nine platoon, had found himself a new game to bet on. Varl, a likeable, handsome rogue,
had come up through the ranks and earned his sergeant pins with sweat and blood. His own, for a start. On Fortis
Binary, he’d taken an upper torso wound that had resulted in serious augmetic work to his shoulder, collarbone and
upper arm. Not long after that, Gaunt had made him sergeant. He’d done it to prove there was no pecking order in the
Tanith. Varl was one of the boys, common as grox muck, but he had attitude and charisma in bucket loads, and that
made him an ideal leader of men.
You couldn’t help but like Varl. All the men did. He was a joker, a prankster, a troublemaker. He also proved that
a dog-grunt could have the mettle to lead.
Gaunt had hoped he’d bring a common touch to the command echelon of the First. Varl had brought it in spades.
Daur knew that Varl had made sergeant long before the more upstanding and clean-cut Meryn. Maybe that was why
Meryn was such an insufferable feth-head.
Ceglan Varl was playing ringmaster here. His men had made a pit from straw bales, and they appeared to be
orchestrating fights between chickens.
Daur moved his way to the front of the press. No, not chickens…
“Struthids! Lovely young struthids, fit to fight and tough as hell!” Varl was declaiming from the wooden loading
dock above the pit. He lofted one of the birds by the scruff of its neck, expertly avoiding its clacking blade of a beak
and its windmilling, clawed feet. Expertly, that was the word. Daur chuckled. They’d only been on this world five
minutes, and Varl was suddenly an expert handler of the local wildlife.
“Look at this jolly fellow! Look at him, eh?” Varl bantered. “We call him the Major, because he’s nasty as all
feth!”
The Ghosts in the crowd laughed at this.
“Look at his foot-claws! Look here!” Varl grabbed one of the bird’s pistoning feet and splayed the vicious claws
for the crowd to admire. Three centimetres long, sharp as straight silver! “What more do you want?”
A Krassian shouted something.
“Beak? Beak?” Varl replied, looking over and swinging the squirming struthid round. “I’ll give you beak! Mr
Brostin, if you’d be so kind?”
Brostin, the heavy-set flame-trooper from Varl’s platoon, strode out into the straw-strewn ring and held out a spent
brass case from a .30. The bird lunged and cracked the case in two with its scissoring beak.
The crowd roared. Brostin retrieved the broken parts and threw them into the press. Men huddled and fought for
them.
“He’s tough, all right! Yes, sir! The Major is a tough old bird! We all saw what he did to the Captain just now,
didn’t we?”
More shouting.
“The Captain?” called Daur.
Varl saw Daur and balked. “Ah… hello there, sir! How are you? The Captain I refer to… rest his poor soul…
was named after another captain who in no way was meant to resemble you… uh…”
“I’m sure. How much on the Major?”
Varl’s smile returned. “Perhaps you’d care to place your wager with one of my friendly assistants, sir?” Daur saw
Baen, Mkfeyd, Ifvan and Rafflan moving through the crowd, collecting cash and quoting odds.
“What’s he up against, this Major?” Daur shouted.
“Three rounds, no holding, first bleeds, first pays…” said Varl, “…against Mighty Ibram here!”
There was a throaty bellow of approval. Trooper Etton appeared on the other side of the stage, clutching a whiteplumed
struthid juvenile with a silvery beak. He was having trouble holding on to it. Feather fibres drifted in the
warm air.
“No, thanks,” smiled Daur. “My money’s on Mighty Ibram every time.”
“This is fixed! You fix this!” some of the Kottmarkers were yelling.
“Calm yourselves, friends,” said Varl. “We have our own fighter!” called the tallest of the Ostlund Shielders.
Varl addressed the crowd. “A new contender, gents and gents, trained by our worthy Kottland allies here… what’s
the bird’s name?”
The clique of Kottmakers had brought a snapping, scarred struthid fledgling forward. “Redjacq!” their leader
hollered.
“Redjacq indeed! He’s a fine looking beak-brain, and no mistake!” Varl yelled. “Place your bets, folks… next
round is the Major, Tanith-reared and hard as feth, facing off against Redjacq, trained and maintained by our
delightful Kottmark allies there! Ante up! Who’s for the Major?”
“Ten!” shouted a Verghastite.
“Twenty on Redjacq!” howled a Krassian.
“My warknife says the Major guts him.”
Daur peered through the crowd to identify the source of the voice. It was Mkoll. The chief scout was standing,
arms folded, in the middle of the frenzy.
“We spit on your knife!” cried one of the Kottmarkers.
“I… uh… wouldn’t do that if I were you,” said Daur, but the Kottmarkers weren’t listening.
“Gendemen! All bets now stand!” Varl said, taking a nod from Baen. “Round one! Release your fighters!”
The juvenile struthids exploded into the ring from either side to a cacophony of jeers and taunts. Feathers fluttered
up from them. Redjacq sliced and chopped at the Major and more plumage flew. Then the Major lunged in and broke
Redjacq’s neck with a clean bite of its formidable beak.
The tannery’s roof tiles rattled with the uproar that followed. Tanith — and some Krassians —were shouting and
dancing. Wagers were paid out, back and forth: local currency, Imperial coin, trophies, badges, mementos…
Up on the loading dock, Varl did a strutting chicken walk, back and forth, his head bobbing in and out, his elbows
beating chicken wings.
Caught up in the middle of it all, Daur laughed. For a moment, he almost managed to forget how bad things were.
A firm hand gripped his arm. It was Mkoll.
“Stay sharp, sir,” the chief scout said softly. He nodded towards the door. “Over there.”
Daur looked. Varl’s lackey Ifvan was trying to get a group of Kottmarkers to pay out. Daur couldn’t hear the
exchange, but he could read the body language. More Kottmarkers were closing in through the oblivious, dancing
Tanith.
“Back me up,” Daur said.
“I will,” said Mkoll.
Daur pushed through the dancing men. Nine or ten Kottmarkers were gathered around Ifvan now, and others looked
like they were bang out of sportsmanship.
One of the Ostlund troops started shoving Ifvan in the chest. They were all a lot taller than him. They were all a lot
taller than Daur.
Daur cleared his throat and prepared to intervene. At that moment, the Kottmarker behind Ifvan suddenly produced
a trench club. It was a thick cylinder of hardwood with a metal boss, the size of a stick grenade.
Daur lunged forward. The club came down—
—and stopped. There was a solid, meaty thunk that shut the room up suddenly.
The Kottmarker had dropped the dub. His sleeve was pinned to the doorpost by a Tanith warknife. There was a
terrible, pregnant silence.
Daur glanced back at Mkoll, but the scout chief simply shrugged in bemusement.
“I hate a bad loser,” said Varl, from the stage ten metres away. He was staring at the Kottmarkers surrounding
Ifvan. “This is an entertainment. Sport. It isn’t war. We come in here in the spirit of friendly competition and leave
the killing at the door. You’re pissed off. Well, tough. In the spirit of this place, I say take your money. We don’t want
it. Your bets are wiped. Take your money and get out.”
Some of the Kottmarkers took a step towards the stage.
“Or,” said Varl, sharply, “I start chucking a few more warknives. Someone give me some straight silver.”
Daur blinked. An extraordinary thing happened. There was a ripple of thuds, and a semi-circle of Tanith blades
appeared around Varl’s feet, tips buried in the wood, thrown without hesitation and with complete accuracy from the
crowd.
Varl bent down and plucked out one of the still vibrating blades.
He tossed it up in the air without even looking at it, and caught it again by the grip. “Well?”
The Kottmarkers fled. So did some of the Krassians. The owner of the dub left part of his sleeve pinned to the
doorpost.
The men of the First began to cheer and dap. Varl did a little bow and then balanced the knife on his nose, tip
down.
“That’s enough!” Daur raised his voice. “Let’s clear out and get ready for kit inspection!”
The Ghosts filed out, chattering and laughing. One by one, the knives were retrieved from the stage planks. Brostin
recovered Varl’s blade from the doorpost and tossed it back to the sergeant.
Varl returned Brostin’s. The knives passed in midair. Neither man was looking as he deftly caught his weapon.
The shed was almost empty. Mkoll lingered. Daur climbed up onto the loading dock next to Varl.
“I’m impressed,” said Daur. “You kept control.”
“You don’t start something like this if you can’t police it,” Varl said. “First rule of showmanship.”
“Still, it was magnanimous of you to let them go without paying.”
Varl smiled. “All part of the show. Besides, Ifvan and Baen picked their pockets on the way out.”
“Captain?”
Daur looked down into the body of the shed. Mkoll stood in the doorway.
“Signal’s come through,” Mkoll said. “They’re moving the wounded back up the line.”
The first wounded had begun to filter back during the late afternoon, and by the time the bombardment ended and the
assault had subsided, they were streaming into the field stations. Some came walking, others carried by stretcher
bearers or supported by their comrades, some were borne on barrows or on shellcarts.
Dorden, the First’s chief medic, had moved his team up to a triage station just after lunch. The station, designated
4077, was just four kilometres to the rear of the front line. They endured the later stages of the bombardment while
they prepped the area. The ground shook. Tent canvas flapped. Surgical tools rattled on their trays.
“There’s no mains water supply,” reported Mtane, one of the regiment’s three qualified medics.
“None at all?” asked Curth, laying out clean blades on a cloth-covered tray.
Mtane shook his head. “There’s a bowser. About half-full. The Alliance orderlies can’t promise it’s clean.”
“Lesp!” Dorden called. The lean orderly ran up. “Set up some stoves and start boiling water. Wait!” Lesp paused
as he prepared to dash off again. Dorden handed him a small paper packet. “Sterilising tablets. Do your best.”
Curth broke open a box of anti-bacterial gel packed in fat metal tubes and passed them around. “Use them
sparingly,” she admonished. “It’s the only carton we’ve got.”
The triage station was a collection of dirty, long-frame tents pitched to the west of a dead woodland. The access
ramps into the first dugouts of the 55th sector workings began just fifty metres east of them. They were terribly
exposed, the first above-ground features this side of the Peinforq Line. The wood — Hambley Wood, apparently —
was proof of their vulnerability. It was a sea of soft mud and old craters, stubbled with the burnt stumps of thousands
of trees. The whole area smelled of wet-rot and mulch.
The First’s medicae team shared the station with a Krassian detail and a gang of Alliance corpsmen. When Curth
went outside the Ghosts’ tent for a final lho-stick before the real work began, she was surprised and disgusted at the
filthy state of the locals. Their scrubs and — worse —their hands, were soiled. Many were ill. Some were
intoxicated, probably from drinking neat rubbing alcohol.
Foskin, the most junior orderly, joined her for a smoke.
“How many are they going to kill by transmitting infection?” she asked.
“Let’s just make sure all the Ghosts come to us,” he said.
It was nothing like that simple. The bodies and the walking wounded that began to pass back to the triage station
were so drenched in mud it was impossible to distinguish rank or regiment or even gender.
Curth spent five minutes sewing up a thigh wound before she realised it was Flame-Trooper Lubba she was
treating.
One of Kolea’s old mob, from nine platoon.
She rinsed his face and smiled when the tattoos were revealed. “How’s Gol?” she asked.
“He’s okay, ma’am. Came through it, last I saw.”
“And how’s Tona shaping up?”
“The sarge? She was fine.”
Curth was pleased. They were calling Tona Criid “the sarge” already. Ana Curth was the only person in the First
who knew the secret. Kolea had known, but it had been lost along with his identity. There was a madam called
Aleksa who knew too, but Curth hadn’t seen her since Phantine. The two children Criid and Caffran had “adopted”,
two kids who now waited with the camp followers at Rhonforq, were, in truth, Kolea’s. He’d presumed them lost.
When he’d found out they were alive after all, it was too late. Orphans, they’d bonded with Criid. It was too late to
wreck their world again.
That’s what Kolea had believed anyway, before injury had robbed them of his character.
Curth felt it was her responsibility to watch over them all.
The anonymous wounded plodded in, through the late afternoon. Dorden found cases of shrapnel wounding,
concussive damage and several chronic examples of harm done by gas, both caustic and lachrymatory. He extracted a
five centimetre piece of hand-bomb casing from DaFelbe’s jaw, twenty-two nails from the foot and leg of Trooper
Charel, and a broken length of bayonet from the ribcage of Jessi Banda.
She came round on the table as he was cleaning the wound prior to excising the foreign body.
“Rawne!” she gasped. “Rawne!”
“Easy there,” he scolded. He looked at Lesp. “Any morphosia?” Lesp shook his head.
“How’s Major Rawne?” Banda called out, convulsing. “Easy,” said Dorden. “You’ll be okay”
“Rawne…” she murmured. “Was he hurt?” Dorden asked. Banda had passed out.
“No breath sounds on the left,” Lesp reported. “We’re losing her.”
“Her lung’s collapsed,” said Dorden matter-of-factly, and set to work.
Some of the most terribly wounded came from sixteen platoon, though there weren’t many of them. One of the
Krassians told Curth that sixteen had been virtually wiped out by shellfire.
“Trooper Kuren, who’d made it through the horrors of Operation Larisel on Phantine unscathed, had lost part of
his leg. They’re all dead,” he told Curth. “Maroy’s dead.”
She shivered. “Dead?”
“Almost all of us. The fething shells, like murder…”
She looked across the station. Mtane was trying to pull together a Krassian’s gaping chest. Foskin and Chayker
were holding down a man who was going into a grand mal seizure and vomiting blood. Dorden was fighting to save
Banda’s life.
“Sergeant Maroy’s dead,” said Curth.
Dorden nodded sadly. “Rawne may be too,” he said.
Around 17.00 hours, the tide of wounded ebbed. Dorden’s triage station alone had dealt with nearly five hundred
bodies.
The light was bad, choked by the shell-smoke. Drizzle pattered in. The ground inside and outside of the tents was
awash with blood, and pieces of discarded uniform and equipment were scattered everywhere.
Light wounded had been sent along the road to Rhonforq and the other reserve stations. The really sick and injured
were being ferried by cart and stretcher to the main field hospitals. Dorden made sure that all the seriously wounded
Ghosts were labelled so they would be conveyed to his mill infirmary at Rhonforq.
Curth and Dorden exited their triage tent during the lull, complaining to each other about their parlous lack of
supplies. Curth smoked another lho-stick, which Dorden shared briefly, though it made him cough. She was afraid
she was teaching him bad habits.
“Hey,” she said, nudging him. “Over there.” Across the churned mud of the station. Alliance orderlies were
conveying medical supplies to their tents on sack-barrows.
Curth ran over, tossing her stick-butt into the mud. “Hey!”
Dorden tried to stop her “No, Ana! Don’t!”
It was too late. Curth had reached the sack-barrows. She grabbed a box off the nearest and ripped open the lid, the
Alliance orderlies objecting angrily.
“Imperial supplies! This stuff is stamped for use by the First-and-Only! You bastards! You stole this!”
“Be off!” growled an Aexegarian.
“I will not! Our supplies went missing, and we’ve been fighting to survive without them! You had them diverted,
didn’t you? You fething well stole our med supplies!”
“Ana! Please! It’s not worth it!” Dorden cried as he came over. He’d seen this kind of despair-induced corruption
too many times before. The Alliance was running painfully short of essential supplies. A big shipment of fresh
medical goods must have seemed too choice a treasure to ignore. He’d get some more, he’d get some more shipped
in from the Munitorium vessels. It wasn’t worth confronting these miserable, desperate wretches.
“Hell, no!” Curth exclaimed, and tried to gather up some of the cartons.
A thuggish Alliance trooper with a dirty bandage around his head struck out at her, and knocked her over into the
mud. The cartons went flying.
“No, oh no… no you don’t!” Dorden yelled and leapt at the Alliance orderlies, pulling them back off the fallen
Curth, who was hunched in a foetal position in the mud to protect herself from their toecaps.
They turned on him. One punched him in the mouth, another kicked him in the hip. Dorden yelped, and then threw a
jab that laid one of the Aexegarians out. Then they really started to pound on him. Curth got up and threw herself
back into the fray, clawing and punching and kicking.
A bolt-round went off, very loud in the close air.
The brawling figures broke away from Curth and Dorden at the sound. Ibram Gaunt walked across the muck, white
smoke escaping through the vents of his bolt pistol’s flash retarder. He was splashed from head to toe in mud and
blood, and powder burns marked his cheeks.
“I am Imperial Commissar Gaunt,” he said. “I am known to be a fair man, until I am pushed. You’ve just pushed
me.”
Gaunt lowered his weapon and shot two of the Aexegarians dead where they stood. The rest fled. For good
measure, Gaunt sighted and shot down one of the escapees too. Guardsmen, medics and Aexe personnel all around
the field station stood and gawped in shock.
Gaunt helped Dorden and Curth to their feet.
“No one does that to my medicae core,” he said.
Curth looked at him in frank fear. She’d never seen him like this.
“I’m a commissar,” he said to her. “I don’t think you realise what a commissar is, Ana. Get used to it.”
Gaunt looked away. “You men!” he shouted at a group of stunned onlookers. “Gather up these supplies and
distribute them evenly between the Guard and Alliance medical teams at this station. Surgeon Curth here will
supervise.”
She nodded.
“Dorden?” Gaunt turned to the old medicae. He had a swollen eye and his lip was split.
“All right?”
“I’ll survive,” said Dorden. Gaunt could tell he was more angry than hurt. Angry that the fight had started at all,
angry that he’d been stupid enough to get involved. And more than anything else, angry at the way Gaunt had just
demonstrated the bleak side of Imperial Guard discipline. Dorden had vowed never to kill. He’d broken that vow
once, on Menazoid Epsilon, in order to save Gaunt’s life. Now he saw Gaunt take life wantonly, in the name of iron
discipline.
“Doctor?” Gaunt said.
“Sir?”
“See to Rawne, please.”
Gaunt’s arrival had marked a fresh influx of casualties, the majority of them Krassians and Alliance, but also a good
number from at least seven Ghost platoons, including those of Rawne, Domor, Theiss and Obel. The injuries in
Theiss’ and Obels’ units were mainly from shells. Some of these wounds, like Trooper Kell’s, were devastating.
Others were insidious.
Trooper Tokar would be the first Tanith man to have to learn as a necessity the sign language used by previously
blast-deafened Verghastites.
In Domor’s platoon, and in Rawne’s, the injuries were from close-quarters fighting. Milo, unharmed himself apart
from a few bruises, carried in Trooper Nehn, who’d had his skull cracked by a trench club. Trooper Osket had lost
an eye, and then had suffered the misfortune of grabbing a bayonet thrust at him. The blade had chopped in between
his middle and third finger, right down through the palm to the base of the thumb. Corporal Chiria, one of the
Verghastite girls in Domor’s outfit, had massive lacerations that would scar her plain but cheerful face forever.
Rawne was unconscious. Feygor and Ledan carried him in on an improvised stretcher made of duckboards.
“What do you know?” asked Dorden briskly as he started to cut away the major’s tunic and undershirt.
“Solid round to the gut,” said Ledan, three platoon’s corps-man. “Close range.”
“How long ago?”
“Two, maybe two and a half hours. It was mayhem in the trench. Bloody mayhem. I found him in a funkhole. Banda
was holding on to him, but he’d passed out long before that.”
“Banda was brought in earlier,” said Dorden, washing the filth from Rawne’s stomach.
“I sent her up,” said Leclan. “In the first wave. I didn’t want to move Rawne. I called for a surgeon to come to him
at the front, but the vox was down and the runners I sent never came back.”
“Feth!” Dorden said, examining the gunshot. “He’s lost a lot of blood. A feth of a lot.” He leaned over and
grabbed Rawne’s dog-tags, calling out the blood type printed on them to a waiting orderly.
“Is Banda all right?” Leclan asked.
Dorden stopped his relentless work, and looked at Leclan. The man was frightened and worried. Corpsmen like
Leclan were standard troopers trained to administer only the most basic first aid. They weren’t medics. They were
just there to do the fundamentals until medics came. “Jessi Banda’s going to live. It was touch and go. But she’ll be
fine.”
Leclan sagged visibly with relief.
“You did all right,” Dorden said, returning to his work.
“He’s not going to die, is he?” Feygor asked. The involuntary sarcasm injected into his voice by his augmetic
throat made Dorden snort.
“We’ll see.”
“How’s the thumb?”
Beltayn looked up and saw Gaunt. He scrambled up from the ammo hopper he’d been sitting on and showed the
colonel-commissar his bandaged hand.
“Hurt a bit when they reset it, but it’s fine. Doc Mtane says no heavy lifting, and absolutely no complicated vox
work. In fact, he recommends a vacation somewhere where there’s no gunfire.”
“Nice try,” said Gaunt.
They were alone at the edge of the triage station, by the side of the trackway where long grass bushed out from
broken fence posts. The sun had begun to come out its light turned sooty by the vapour of war.
A train of stretcher bearers went past, heading west. Gaunt sat down on the grass bank, and Beltayn resumed his
seat on the old hopper. “You have the casualty lists?” Gaunt asked. Beltayn produced a data-slate.
Rawne had once joked, bleakly, that the Tanith spared Gaunt that one grim responsibility of commanding officers
everywhere, the letter home. In truth, few Guard COs bothered to inform next of kin, though a handful of regiments
were famous for the scrupulous way they did it. Gaunt had no one to write to, even if he’d felt the inclination. Tanith
was gone, and most of the Verghastites who’d joined the Ghosts had done so because they were leaving no one
behind.
Gaunt remembered the old days, when Oktar had charged him with composing the LIA notices for the families of
the Hyrkan dead. After Balhaut, it had taken him the best part of a week.
Gaunt studied the data-slate.
“Sixteen platoon pretty much doesn’t exist anymore,” said Beltayn. “I suppose we fold the survivors into squads
that need making up.”
Gaunt nodded. From the list, he realised that the Ghosts’ strength had dropped to less than one hundred platoons
for the first time since Verghast. He felt his anger returning. War consumed manpower. That was one of the first
things they drummed into you at the commissariate.
But this war… this war consumed manpower like a glutton. It fed on death, even though it was bloated and full.
“Can you get me a link to Van Voytz?” Gaunt asked.
“I can try,” said Beltayn.
As his adjutant began to set up his vox-caster, Gaunt got to his feet, and wandered a little way down the track.
Columns of Aexe Alliance foot soldiers were moving towards him from the reserves, weary and dirty. More bodies
for the war machine.
Gaunt saw a lone figure trudging his way, overtaking the toiling infantry ranks. “Captain Daur?”
“Sir,” Daur saluted. He was out of breath. He’d been jogging all the way from Rhonforq.
“The reserves are in safe hands, I trust?”
“Mkoll, sir,” Daur panted. “And you’re here?”
“It looked bad. The vox was down. I wanted to… to know.”
“It was bad. Over a hundred casualties. Thirty-six dead that I know of, including Maroy. Rawne may not make it,
either.”
Daur looked away, gazing across the neglected fields and the withered woodlands.
“It’s going to chew us all up, isn’t it, sir?” he said.
“Not if I have anything to say about it,” Gaunt replied. “Be advised, Ban… with Rawne out, you have third
ranking as of now.”
“Understood.”
“I want you to bring up five platoons early to replace two, three, eleven, twelve and sixteen. You call it. We’d best
forget the standing rota. Any platoon that sees hard action gets rotated for fresh from now on.”
Daur nodded. “You want me at the front now?”
“I understand Colm saw some feth today too. I’ll drop him back in favour of you.”
“He’s all right?”
“Far as I know. But I want to go easier on him. He’s had a rough time these past eighteen months. He’s still not…
not his old self.”
“That’s fine, sir,” Daur said.
“Colm will take the reserve, and you and I will lead at the front.”
“Yes sir.” Daur registered a certain pride. For the first time it would be Gaunt and a Verghastite in command at the
sharp end. It felt like a coming of age. But his feelings were mixed. Rawne wounded, Corbec pulled back… would
the Ghosts still be Ghosts without them?
When he first signed up, at the Act of Consolation, Daur had imagined a time when he’d be Gaunt’s XO. He’d all
but willed death on Rawne and Corbec so that he could bring the Verghast strength to the fore.
Now it was happening, and he felt nothing but keen loss.
“Sir?” Beltayn called out. Gaunt strode over to his adjutant, who was listening intently to the phones of his voxset.“
No luck with the general, sir,” Beltayn explained, “but I’ve spoken to his aide. You’re invited to dinner with the
staff chiefs at Meiseq tomorrow night. Sixteen hundred hours. Dress uniform.”
Larkin wandered down the fire trench between stations 290 and 291, his long-las hanging from one hand and his
Tanith blade hanging from the other. Troopers got out of his way. Mad Larkin was mad again.
“Larks?” Corbec called out, approaching him. “How you doing?”
Corbec had been shipping Sillo off to a triage station when word had reached him that Larkin was on the prowl.
“He looks like he’s gone right over!” Trooper Bewl had said excitedly.
Larkin blinked and slowly recognised Corbec. He glanced down at the weapons he was carrying as if he’d only
just become aware of them, and carefully set them down on the firestep. Then he sat down next to them.
Corbec shooed the gawking troopers around him back to their duties and went down to Larkin’s side.
“Bad day, Larks?”
“Horrible.”
“It’s been tough all round. Anything you want to talk about?”
“Yes.” Larkin paused. He opened his mouth to speak the name “Lijah Cuu”, but stopped himself. So badly, he
wanted to tell Corbec about Cuu. Cuu the maniac. Cuu the psycho. Cuu, who would have killed him but for the
sudden shelling.
Cuu, who had killed Bragg.
But now it seemed pointless. Loglas, the only witness, was very dead. If Larkin brought a charge, it would be
Cuu’s word against his. And Cuu had proved to be bulletproof up till now.
Larkin knew Colm would take him seriously. But he also knew that Colm was hidebound by the rules.
As soon as the shells started to fall, Cuu had fled, leaving Larkin alone. Larkin had been so terrified, arms up over
his head, eyes closed, it had taken him a moment to realise Cuu had actually gone and only Larkin’s fear of Cuu was
left behind.
No, there was no point, Larkin decided. The only way to be free from his fear was to face it. Corbec couldn’t help
him. Gaunt couldn’t. The system couldn’t.
Lijah Cuu had to die. It was that simple. Cuu wanted the score settled, didn’t he? So it would be settled. Fething
straight, sure as sure, one way or another.
“Larks?” Corbec said. “What did you want to tell me about? You look like you’re all upset.”
“I am,” said Hlaine Larkin. “Loglas died,” he confessed.
That was true, but it was also a lie. That wasn’t why Larkin was most upset.
But it was all Corbec needed to know.
SIX
ONE HAND GIVES, ONE HAND TAKES
“I say, if they want to skulk, let them. I’d be interested to see great skulkers at work.”
—Colonel Ankre
That night, and the morning that followed, it was mercifully quiet in 55th sector. It was as if the tide of war had
drawn out from that part of the line, slack, low.
It was flood tide elsewhere. Further south down the Naeme Valley, the 47th and 46th sectors were brutalised by
twelve straight hours of heavy bombardment. A considerable stretch of the so-called Seronne Line, which ran east
from the end of the Peinforq Sectors right across country to the Kottmark Massif, came under shellfire, and then
armoured assault. The worst clashes were just south of the Vostl Delta.
To the north, there were intermittent light attacks and raids all through the night at Loncort and the Salient.
Unconfirmed reports were circulating that sectors north of Gibsgatte had endured the biggest offensive of the year,
and that battle still raged there.
The morning was damp and fog-bound. With Beltayn his only companion, Gaunt travelled north for Meiseq.
Beltayn said little. He could tell Gaunt was in a foul temper, and didn’t want to provoke anything.
A staff car conveyed them as far as Ongche, where they boarded a despatch train bound for the north. The train
was half-empty, and rattled along through misty farmland and rain-swept heath.
Prior to departure, just after dawn, Gaunt had made a final inspection of the First’s positions. Daur’s relief squads
were at the front by then, though Corbec was to remain as line XO until Gaunt’s return.
At the end of his tour, Gaunt had made a call at the military hospital in Rhonforq, spending time with the injured
and looking in on the critical cases. Rawne had survived the night though he’d required secondary surgery in the
small hours to staunch internal bleeding.
Dorden was so fatigued by then he seemed almost asleep on his feet and the bruises he’d taken in the beating were
starting to nag at him. Gaunt had been intending to ask the chief medic to accompany him to Meiseq, but one look at
Dorden stifled the idea. Dorden was needed at Rhonforq, if only to get some rest Gaunt knew that Dorden was still
angry with him about the discipline killings. He had a right to be, in Gaunt’s opinion. Gaunt had been in a dazed rage
the afternoon before, weary with the pointless losses he’d witnessed at station 289. He’d just snapped.
As an Imperial commissar, Gaunt was unusual, quite apart from the fact that he held command rank. Commissars
were universally feared. They were the Guard’s instruments of discipline and control, the lash that kept the soldiery
in line and drove them forward. They were there to drum the tenets of the Imperial creed into the minds of the
enlisted men, and then give them stark, regular reminders of that truth. Summary execution, even for minor violations,
was acceptable stock-in-trade for a commissar. The great Yarrick himself had once said that it was a commissar’s
job to be a figure of greater fear and threat to an Imperial Guardsman than any enemy.
That was not Gaunt’s way. Experience had shown him that morale was better served by encouragement and trust
than by an unpredictable temper and a pistol. He’d had a good example in the form of his mentor, the late Delane
Oktar. Oktar’s philosophy of morale had been based on trust and tolerance too. There had been times when a firm
hand had been called for, a few more when action had worked better than words.
But Gaunt prided himself on his fairness, and knew that he was able to count men like Dorden as friends because
of it. At the field hospital, he’d acted just like a typical commissar. Dorden hadn’t said anything, but Gaunt had seen
the disappointment in his eyes.
As the train rattled north, he turned the incident over in his mind. There was no point setting the blame on fatigue.
Fatigue implied weakness, and a commissar could never be weak. He realised it was more a matter of futility. He’d
come into the Aexe war with reservations, and each step of the way to the front had confirmed his fears. War was not
senseless of itself. Faced with the immortal obscenity of Chaos, humankind had a true cause to rally around and fight
for. There was a greater good, a purpose, even here on Aexe.
It was the manner of this war that was senseless. The dismissive contempt with which the Alliance threw men and
materiel at the enemy. The antique thinking that believed brute strength was the main determining factor behind
victory. It made Gaunt angry to see this, angrier still to have the First caught up in it. The afternoon before, he’d been
smothered by the futility, and it had worked its ministry on him.
Outside, the world went by. One world, just one of thousands, hundreds of thousands, that combined to form the
greatest achievement in human history. The Imperium of Mankind. Many believed that the Imperium was so vast in
scale, so huge in scope, that the actions of one man could not affect it. That wasn’t true. If everyone thought that way,
the Imperium would simply collapse in upon itself overnight Each and every human soul determined their part of
Imperial culture. That was the only thing the Emperor asked of a man. Be true to yourself, and all those myriad tiny
contributions would combine to build a culture that could endure until the stars went out.
Beltayn was asleep, his head nodding onto his chest, his bandaged hand cradled in the other.
Beyond the window pane, broken woodland flickered by, cut by hillsides dark with rain. A stream flashed like a
drawn sword. Meadows lay invisible beneath cloaks of white mist. Uplands broke through fog like the tips of grey
reefs. A lone, lightning-scarred tree stood vigil on a bare hill. A village slumbered, derelict. Clouds as thick as
ruffled taffeta chased each other across the sky.
Gaunt woke from a recurring dream about Balhaut, and realised the train had stopped. The rain drummed down and
gloomy woodlands surrounded the carriage windows. He checked his timepiece: an hour past noon. They should be
in Chossene by now.
He got up and walked down the empty carriage to the door. Opening the window, he smelt the damp undergrowth
and soil of the wood, and heard birdcalls and the batter of rain on the leaves. Other passengers were peering out.
Down at the locomotive, engineers had dismounted.
Gaunt opened the door and jumped down onto the overgrown track side.
The locomotive had broken down, one of the engineers told him. Repairs were beyond them. They were going to
have to wait until a relief tender could come out from Chossene.
“How long will that be?” Gaunt asked.
“Three or four hours, sir.”
Gaunt shook Beltayn to wake him up. “Come on,” he said. “We’ve some walking to do.”
“What’s wrong, sir?” asked Beltayn sleepily. Gaunt smiled. “Something’s awry.”
The mists were beginning to clear as they trudged up through the woods, heading west on a little-used path. Pale
sunlight shone down through the branches of the wood. The rain had stopped, but still rainwater fell, dripping down
from the canopy. The air smelled of wet, and the scent of some wild-flower.
The engineer had given them directions. A village, Veniq, lay half an hour’s walk to the west. Someone there
could provide the Imperial officer with transport, the engineer supposed. In his opinion, it was better to stay with the
train. Help was coming. Eventually.
Beltayn had been in favour of waiting too. “We might walk for hours. Or get lost. Or—”
“If we wait for the relief tender, we’ll miss my appointment for sure. Meiseq’s still a good way away. We walk.”
The track was muddy and it was slow going. Beltayn insisted on carrying Gaunt’s overnight pack but, with his
own kit and his damaged hand, he was over-encumbered and kept stopping to put something down and resettle his
load.
The cool air was bracing. Gaunt realised he was raising a sweat, and took off his stormcoat, flopping it over his
left shoulder. Behind them, back down through the woods, they heard a train whistle. If that was the relief tender,
then they really had made a bad choice and wasted a lot of effort.
“You want to go back, sir?” asked Beltayn when he heard the whistle note.
Gaunt shook his head. This brisk walk through the empty calm of the wood was like a balm. His lungs were full of
cool, smoke-free air and his nostrils full of flower scent. It was amazingly strong now. He didn’t know what it was.
Little bright-blue flowers with odd-shaped petals covered the ground between the trees, showing over the wet moss
and ivy. He wondered if it was them.
He turned to Beltayn and took his overnight bag from him. Then he took Beltayn’s pack too.
“That’s not necessary,” said Beltayn.
“Ah, let me carry them a while,” said Gaunt.
The track wound through the wood, but there was no sign of farmland or the village. They crossed a rushing brook by
way of an ancient stone bridge, black with mould. Bird calls and the burr of insects floated eerily through the trees.
In one dense thicket, the beythorn was strung with spider webs that glinted with beads of rainwater like quartz.
“What did the engineer mean about brigands?” Beltayn asked, pausing to get a stone out of his boot.
“Deserters, I believe,” said Gaunt. “Over the years, bands of them have run to ground out here in the wooded
country. They live by pilfering from farms, poaching…”
“Brigandry?” Beltayn added. “Being, as it seems, brigands.”
Gaunt shrugged.
“Well, maybe this was a bad id—” Beltayn began, but shut up as Gaunt raised a hand.
Across the next clearing, a stand of white birch with gleaming bark, a deer had emerged from the smoke of mist. It
stood for a moment, regarding them with its head cocked. Then it turned and darted away.
A heartbeat later, and they saw others, distantly, chasing soundlessly through the woods.
Like ghosts.
A full hour after they had begun their hike, they emerged from the edge of the wood at a point where the land became
planted fields. Swaying heads of young, green wheat covered the slopes down the waist of a hill towards a fresh line
of woodland in the valley.
It was a decent vantage point, but there was no sign of any village.
“I’m hungry,” said Beltayn.
Gaunt looked at him.
“Just saying,” he said.
Gaunt put the bags down and mopped his brow. The walk had reinvigorated him, but he was beginning to agree
with Beltayn. This had been a bad idea.
He checked the position of the sun, and read his timepiece. He wished he’d brought his compass, or his locator, or
even his auspex, but there had seemed no need that morning. His bag contained nothing but his shaving kit, his
number one uniform, and his copy of The Spheres of Longing.
He wanted to ask Beltayn which way he favoured, but to do so would be to admit he was lost. He decided they
should follow the track down the edge of the field where it curved into the bottom of the valley. Perhaps there’d be a
road down there.
They’d gone about a hundred paces, when he stopped again. “You see that?” he asked.
Beltayn squinted. Down in the valley, hidden in the woodland there, was a building. Grey chafstone, the roof made
of slate. Some sort of tower poked up through the canopy.
“You’ve got sharp eyes, sir,” said Beltayn. “I’d never have seen that in a thousand years.”
“Come on,” said Gaunt.
It was a chapel, old and rundown, buried in the green twilight of the wood. Trailing ivy and fleece-flower clung to
its walls. Bright green lichens gnawed the chafstone. They walked around the partially-collapsed wall, in through the
old gate, and up the path to the door. The scent was back, that flower scent. It was so strong, it made Gaunt feel like
sneezing. He could see no flowers.
Gaunt pushed open the door and walked into the cold gloom of the chapel. The interior was plain, but well-kept.
At the end of the rows of hardwood pews, a taper burned at the Imperial altar. Both men made the sign of the aquila,
and Gaunt walked down the aisle towards the graven image of the Emperor. In the stained glass of the lancet
windows, he saw the image of Saint Sabbat amongst the worthies.
“Well,” murmured a voice from the darkness. “There you are at last.”
She was very old, and blind. A strip of black silk was wound around her head across her eyes. Her silver hair had
been plaited tightly against the back of her skull. Age had hunched her, but stood erect she would have towered over
Gaunt.
There was no mistaking her red and black robes.
“Sister,” Gaunt said, and bowed.
“Welcome here. There is no need for obeisance.”
Gaunt looked up. How had she known he was bowing? For a scant second, he wondered if she was some gifted
seer, but then he caught himself. Stupid. Her senses were sharp, and attuned to her blindness. She’d simply noted the
direction of his voice. “I am Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt,” he said.
She nodded, as if she didn’t especially care. Or, Gaunt thought, as if she already knew. “Welcome to the Chapel of
the Holy Light Abundant, Veniq.”
“We’re near the village then?”
“Well, the name is a little misleading. Veniq is about four kilometres south of here.” Beltayn groaned quietly.
“Your boy is disheartened to hear that,” she said.
“My boy? My adjutant?”
“I hear two of you. Am I mistaken?”
“No. We’re trying to reach Veniq, to find transport. Our train… well, it doesn’t matter. I need to be in Meiseq
tonight.”
She sat down on one of the pews, feeling her way with one hand, leaning on her staff with the other. “That’s a long
way,” she said.
“I know,” said Gaunt. “Can you perhaps set us on the right road?”
“You’re on the right road already, Ibram, but you won’t reach your destination for a while.”
“Meiseq?”
“Oh, you’ll be there tonight. I meant…”
“What?”
She settled herself against the stiff back of the pew. “My name is Elinor Zaker, once of the Adepta Sororitas
Militant, the order of Our Martyred Lady. Now warden and keeper of this chapel.”
“I am honoured to meet you, sister. What… what did you mean about my destination?”
She turned her head towards him. It was the fluid neck-swivel of a human who had been habituated to helmetdisplay
target sensors. For a moment, Gaunt felt like she was aiming at him.
“I should speak less. There are things that mustn’t be said, not yet. You’ll have to excuse me. I get so few visitors,
I feel the urge to gabble.”
“What things mustn’t be said?” Gaunt started to say, but Beltayn spoke over him.
“How long have you been here, lady?” he asked.
“Years and years,” she said. “So many, now. I tend the place, as well as I am able. Does it look trim and clean?”
“Yes,” said Gaunt, glancing around.
She smiled a little. “I can’t tell. I do my best. Some things I see clearly, but not my environment. He doesn’t sound
very young.”
Gaunt realised this last comment had been made about Beltayn. “My adjutant? He’s… what, thirty-two?”
“Thirty-one last birthday, sir,” said Beltayn from the far end of the aisle.
“Well, he’s no boy, then.”
“No,” said Gaunt.
“I understood it would be a boy. No disrespect, Ibram. You’re important too. But the boy, he’s the crux.”
“You seem to be speaking in riddles, sister.”
“I know. It must be very distressing. There are so many things I can’t say. It would ruin everything if I did. And it’s
really too important, so that mustn’t happen. Was there a boy? Very young? The youngest of all?”
“My previous adjutant was a boy,” said Gaunt, suddenly very unsettled. “His name was Milo. He’s a trooper
now.”
“Ah,” she said, nodding. “It gets it wrong sometimes.”
“What does?” asked Gaunt.
“The tarot.”
“How can you read cards when you can’t see?” Beltayn asked warily.
She turned her head towards the sound of his voice. Another careful aim. Beltayn stepped back slightly as if he
had been target-acquired. “I don’t,” she said. “It reads me.”
With her head turned, Gaunt could see the long, pink line of the scar that ran over the top of her skull, seaming her
white hair like a plough-furrow through com, down to the left side base of her neck. He sighed inwardly. He’d
almost been taken in by her talk. He’d been on the verge of believing they had stumbled upon — or been fatefully
drawn to — a prophetic being. But now everything, even her peculiarly apt references to Milo, took on another
meaning.
She was mad. Brain-damaged in some long-ago action. Rambling, talking at shadows, deprived of contact by her
lonely vigil.
Gaunt needed to get on. “Look, sister… we are heading for Meiseq. I believe lives depend on us getting there. Is
there any way you can help us?”
“Not really. Not in the grand scheme of things. You’re going to have to help yourselves. You and the boy, I mean.
As far as Meiseq goes… I wouldn’t want to go there. Ugly place. An affront to the eyes. But you can borrow my car,
if you like.”
“Your car?”
“No use to me anymore. It’s garaged in one of the barns across the lane. You might have to clear undergrowth from
the doors, but the car runs. I turn it over every day. The keys are on the doorpost hook.”
Gaunt nodded to Beltayn, and the adjutant hurried out of the chapel.
“Has he gone?” she asked.
“Gone to find the car,” Gaunt said.
“Sit with me,” she whispered.
Gaunt sat beside her on the pew. Rambling though she was, Sister Zaker was doing him a favour, so he could at
least humour her for a minute or two.
He could smell the flower-scent again. Where had he smelled that before?
“It will be hard,” she confided.
“What will?”
“Herodor,” she replied.
“Herodor?” The only Herodor Gaunt knew of was a tactically insignificant colony world some distance to
coreward. He shrugged.
“I’ve been allowed to pass on a few things,” she said. “There is harm throughout. But the greatest harm, ultimately,
is within. Within your body.”
“My body?” Gaunt echoed. He didn’t really want to get drawn into this. But she deserved civility.
“Figuratively, Ibram. Your body, as DeMarchese describes the body. Have you read DeMarchese?”
“No, sister.” Gaunt wasn’t even sure who DeMarchese was.
“Well, do so. The harm is in two parts. Two dangers, one truly evil, one misunderstood. The latter holds the key.
It’s important you remember that, because you commissars are terribly trigger happy. I think that’s it. Oh, there is
something else. Let your sharpest eye show you the truth. That’s it. Your sharpest eye. Well, that about does it. I hope
I’ve made myself clear.”
“I—” Gaunt began.
“I have to sweep the floor now,” she said.
She paused and turned her head towards him. “I really shouldn’t say this. I’m stepping way beyond my role… but
when you see her, commend me to her. Please. I miss her.”
From outside, the cough and snarl of a motor engine racing into life broke the stillness.
“Of course,” said Gaunt. He gently took her hand and kissed it.
“The Emperor protect you, sister.”
“He’ll have his hands full protecting you, Ibram,” she replied. “You, and that boy.”
Gaunt retreated down the aisle. “We’ll return the car.”
“Ah, keep it,” she said with a dismissive wave of her hand.
Outside, in the damp trackway, Beltayn sat behind the wheel of a massive old limousine. Its night-blue body was
chipped with rust and lichen caked its running boards. Weeds had sprouted from the grille and fender. Beltayn had
turned on the headlamps, which burned like the eyes of a nocturnal predator.
Gaunt walked up to the car and ran his hand along the grey hide of the retractable roof. “This come down?” he
called.
Beltayn fiddled with the dashboard controls. With a creak, the hood redacted on concertinaing iron hoops so that
the car was open-topped.
Gaunt got into the back. Beltayn looked back at him and raised his bandaged hand in a rather pathetic gesture.
“I… uh… don’t think I can handle the transmission, sir,” he said.
Gaunt shook his head, amused. “Change places,” he said.
They roared away down the woodland lane, leaving the chapel behind. Sunlight dappled and flickered all over them.
“So…” shouted Beltayn from the back over the roar of the eight cylinder engine, “…how strange was that?”
“Forget it!” yelled Gaunt into the slipstream, changing down as he took the massive, elderly automobile around a
hard bend. “She was just hankering for company.”
“But she knew about Brin—”
“No, she didn’t. A few enigmatic remarks. That’s all. Hive-market preachers use that kind of routine all the time. It
works on the gullible.”
“Okay. So she was trying to fool us?”
“Nothing so calculating. She was just… not altogether there.”
A drove road brought them through Veniq, and then on across open arable tracts to Shonsamarl where they joined the
Northern Highway. Southbound, the highway was thick with munition trains and troop carriers. Northbound, they
caught the end of a convoy of Guard Thunderers and light armour moving up to Gibsgatte. They played leapfrog up
the line of heavy tanks as well as the passing traffic would allow, until the convoy turned off at Chossene, and then
they raced on over the Naeme viaduct and into the cornfield flats of Loncort County.
Fitful light rain and patchy sun followed them through the afternoon along metalled roads that lay like ribbons over
the salty-green fields. They saw slow formations of Alliance tri-planes buzzing east towards the front, and once or
twice the glint of Imperial air support banging in supersonically, taking a new kind of war to this lingering, oldfashioned
theatre.
Shortly before 18.00, Gaunt saw the skyline of Meiseq rising over the fields.
Meiseq was a new town built on old roots. It had been almost entirely razed in the early years of the Aexe War, when
the initial Shadik advance had sliced mercilessly right across country to the Upper Naeme. Five years of counterfighting,
focused especially on the Battle of Diem, had eventually ousted the enemy from a portion of territory
marked in the north-west corner by the city of Gibsgatte and in the south-east by Loncort. This, the so-called
“Meiseq Box”, was now perhaps the most sturdy of the Alliance’s line defences, forming as it did the middle section
of the Northern Front. To the south, from Loncort, ran the Peinforq Line that held the Naeme Valley. To the north ran
the hotly contested sectors beyond Gibsgatte. The Alliance considered the Box so sound it had turned the areas
around Diem into a Memorial Park for the fallen. An eternal flame burned at the site of Diem’s cathedral, and the
oceans of grass around it were lined with row upon row of white, obcordate grave markers.
Meiseq had been rebuilt. Its buildings were made from pressure treated wood-pulp, coated with an emulsion of
rock cement. It perched on an escarpment above a bend in the Upper Naeme, encircled by pales of timber and
flakboard. At its centre rose the wooden cathedral of San Jeval.
It was getting dark by the time they drove up through the fortress gate in the south face of the walls and entered the
town. The cathedral bells were ringing, and lamplighters were igniting the caged chemical torches that lined the
streets.
Meiseq reminded Gaunt of a frontier city. Its prefabricated bulk smelled new and entirely at odds with the old,
stone-built population centres he’d experienced so far on Aexe. It was strategically important, and wanted visitors to
know that, but it seemed little more than a camp, an earthwork. The air smelled of roofing pitch and sweating wood.
He remembered moving in to occupy Rakerville, years ago, with the Hyrkans. That had smelled the same. An
outpost. A brief statement of Imperial activity. A gesture made without confidence at a frontier.
They parked near to the cathedral in a yard surrounded by trees. The trees were old and withered, but the
Aexegarians who had remade Meiseq had remade the trees too, grafting new boughs onto the old trunks shattered by
war. Late blossom and fresh green growth formed a roof over the gnarled, grey trunks.
Gaunt and Beltayn walked down the neighbouring streets, through the light crowds, and found the military hall, a
grim, twin-towered edifice with a walled precinct of its own.
It was nearly 20.00 hours.
Washed and changed, Gaunt left Beltayn in the officio suite appointed to him, and went down to dinner. His guides
were two subalterns of the Bande Sezari, dignified in their plumed head-dresses and green silks. Night had fallen,
and the narrow passages of the military hall were caves of fluttering rushlights.
The dinner had just begun in a terrace room overlooking the river to the west. The last scraps of day-fade smudged
the sky outside, and drum-fires flickered along the low river bend.
There were nineteen officers present and all stood briefly as Gaunt took his place at the empty twentieth place. He
sat and the mumble of conversation resumed. The long table was dressed in white cloth, and lit by four large
candelabra. Gaunt’s place setting twinkled with nine separate pieces of cutlery. A steward brought him an oval white
bowl and filled it with chilled, blush-red soup.
“Imperial?” asked the man to his right, a short thin-faced Aexegarian who had clearly drunk too much already.
“Yes, sir,” said Gaunt, careful to acknowledge the man’s rank boards. A general.
The man stuck out his hand. “Siquem Fep Ortern, C-in-C. 60th sector.”
“Gaunt Tanith First.”
“Ah,” said the drunk. “You’re the one they’ve been talking about.”
Gaunt looked down the table. He saw Golke nearby, and Lord General Van Voytz at the head of the table. He
didn’t recognise any other faces, except for Van Voytz’s chief tactician, Biota. Like Ortern, all the others were senior
Alliance officers, either Aexegarians or Kottmarkers. Gaunt began to feel like he’d walked into a lion’s den. He’d
assumed Van Voytz had summoned him to attend a private dinner where he could voice his disquiet at Alliance
tactics in the company of chosen staff chiefs. He hadn’t expected this, a full, high brass banquet. Though Van Voytz,
imposing in his dark green dress uniform, dominated the head of the table, the presiding influence seemed to come
from the man to Van Voytz’s left, a bullish Kottmark general with a disturbingly bland, pale face, half-moon clerk’s
spectacles and white-blond hair.
Gaunt said little, and ate quietly, catching the conversation strands as they cut back and forth along the table. There
were a lot of thinly veiled, disrespectful remarks about Imperial soldiery, which Gaunt felt were entirely for his
benefit. The Alliance staff were goading him, seeing what they could get away with, seeing what would make him
comment.
Three courses came and went, including the main course of braised game, and were followed by a sticky, oversweet
pudding called sonso that the Alliance officers greeted with much approval. It was a local speciality. Ortern,
and some of the others nearby, extolled its virtues. To Gaunt, it was almost unbearably sugared. He left a good deal
of it.
The stewards cleared the tables, brushed off the cloth, and served sweet black caffeine and amasec in large,
green-glass balloons. The locals, who had all dined with their pressed white napkins tucked into the buttons of their
dress frocks like bibs, now tossed the loose ends over their left shoulders, apparently a custom that showed they
were finished. Gaunt folded his own loosely and left it on his setting.
A tiny servitor drone circled the table, clipping and lighting cigars. One of the Kottmarkers pushed his chair back
and started to smoke a long-stemmed flute-pipe with a water bowl. Ortern offered Gaunt a fat, loose-rolled cigar,
which he declined.
Ortern chuckled. “Your customs, sir, are rather alien. On Aexe Cardinal, a gentleman never leaves his sonso
unfinished. And he never declines the offer of another man’s smokes, for when can he be sure he’ll sample such
delights again?”
“I mean no offence,” said Gaunt. “Is it protocol to accept a cigar and save it for a later time?”
“Of course.”
Gaunt nodded, and took one of the proffered cigars. He knew Corbec would appreciate it.
The conversation now opened up more freely across the table.
“Ibram,” Van Voytz greeted Gaunt from the table-head with a toast of his amasec, “you joined us late.”
“My apologies, lord. I encountered transit problems on my way from Rhonforq.”
“I was afraid you wouldn’t make it,” said the bespectacled Kottmark general. “I was looking forward to meeting
you.”
“Sir,” Gaunt acknowledged.
“Ibram, this is Vice General Cam Martane, commander in chief of the Kottmark Forces West, and deputy supreme
commander of the Alliance.”
Lyntor-Sewq’s right hand man, then.
Martane smiled blandly at Gaunt and sipped his amasec delicately. “I have been intrigued by certain reports,” he
began.
“Come now, Martane!” Van Voytz cut in, good humouredly. “This is a social event. We can leave the war room
talk for the morning.”
“But of course, lord general,” said Martane deftly, sitting back in his seat. “The war consumes our every waking
moment in ways I forget must seem strange to visitors.”
Van Voytz’s face darkened. It was a tremendous but subtle slight. Martane was deferring to Van Voytz, but doing so
in such a way that suggested the Imperials took the Aexe struggle far less seriously than the locals.
“Actually, my lord,” said Gaunt brightly, “I’d be interested to hear the vice general’s comments.”
The conversation stilled. It was a duel, no more or less, verbal but still vicious. Imperials versus Alliance.
Martane’s remark had been cutting and poised, allowing Van Voytz two options: pass over it and take the put-down,
or trigger a more obvious clash by marking it.
Either way, Van Voytz would lose grace. Now Gaunt had stepped up and deflected the slur as deftly as Martane
had made it.
Martane chose his words carefully. “Colonel Ankre, that worthy son of Kottmark, has suggested to me in
despatches that you have been… less than impressed with our military organisations.”
“Colonel Ankre and I enjoyed a robust exchange of views, sir,” said Gaunt. “I imagine that is what you are
referring to. I admit I’m surprised he took them so to heart he needed to bother you with them.”
Gaunt saw Van Voytz disguise a smile. There was a word that usually followed a remark like Gaunt’s latest. The
word was “touché”.
“I was not bothered by them, colonel-commissar. I was glad Redjacq took the time to instruct me. I would hate to
think that our new Imperial allies are fighting against us. Administratively, I mean.”
Martane was a skilled political operator. There was another comment that seemed light and warm yet had sharp
steel running through it.
“Why would you think that?” Gaunt asked, parrying directly.
“Ankre said you took issue with the workings of chain of command and field etiquette. That you remonstrated with
him over a lack of intelligence.” Martane was more direct now. He clearly felt he had Gaunt on the back foot and
was about to force him into damning himself.
Gaunt saw Golke across the table. The man was impassive. Gaunt recalled clearly how direct and brutal he’d
been with Golke at Rhonforq, Ankre too. He could tell Golke was willing him not to be similarly forthright now.
As if I’d be that stupid, Gaunt thought to himself. “I did, sir,” he said.
“You admit it?” Martane caught the eyes of some of his fellow officers slyly. Gaunt saw Van Voytz ever so slightly
shake his head.
“The Imperial Expedition has come here to be your comrade in arms, vice general. To be, as it were, part of your
determined Alliance against the Shadik Republic. Surely it is right we enmesh ourselves properly into the Alliance
forces? Elements of field etiquette and intelligence were particular to this war, and I needed clarification. I’ve fought
many battles, sir, but I can’t pretend to understand the nuances of this one yet. My question came, vice general,
simply from a desire to best serve the high sezar and the free people of Aexe.”
Martane’s pale cheeks flushed briefly as red as the first course soup. Behind a guard of honesty, Gaunt had just
outstepped him. Martane fumbled. “Ankre also suggested you believed your men too good for front-line combat,” he
began, but it was the blunt move both Gaunt and Van Voytz had been waiting for. Unable to force Gaunt to condemn
himself with his own words, Martane had stumbled and voiced an actual insult.
“For shame, vice general,” growled Van Voytz.
“I am affronted, sir,” Gaunt said.
“Come now, Martane,” Golke said, speaking for the first time. “That is hardly the courtesy we of Aexe extend to
voluntary allies.”
Voices rambled round the table. Many of the officers were embarrassed by their commander’s comment.
Gaunt smiled to himself. As with war, so with decorum, Aexe was so old-fashioned. He remembered some of the
staff dinners when Imperial commanders had hurled abuse at each other across the table and then sat laughing over
the port. There was no such frankness here. There was simply a culture of martial formality that stifled any hope of
victory.
“My apologies, colonel-commissar,” Martane said. He made his excuses, and left the table.
“Nicely done, Ibram,” said Van Voytz. “I see the old political skills of the commissar haven’t left you.”
Gaunt had retired with Van Voytz, Golke and Biota to a small library room. Servitors adjusted the lamps, refreshed
drinks and then left them alone.
“Did you summon me here to make a fool of Martane, sir?” Gaunt asked.
“Maybe,” smiled Van Voytz, as if the idea was delicious.
“Vice General Martane needs no help making a fool of himself,” Golke said.
“I was hoping I would come away with more than that satisfaction tonight,” Gaunt said.
“Just so,” said Van Voytz. “I’ve studied your despatches, and listened to the comments our friend Count Golke here
has passed along… unofficially, of course. You could have caused trouble with Ankre, Ibram. He speaks as he finds,
and he speaks ill of you.”
“Quite obviously. But I won’t stand by and see Guard units hammered for no reason.”
Van Voytz sat down in a large padded armchair by the fireplace, and took a book at random off the nearest shelf.
“This is a difficult theatre, Ibram. One that requires tact. If we had supreme command here, I’d gladly take the
Alliance and shake it by the scruff until it worked properly. Worked like a modem army. God-Emperor, a full Guard
army employed here purposefully could turn Shadik back in a month.” He looked up at Gaunt. “But we don’t have
that luxury. Albeit nominally, the Alliance leaders — Lyntor-Sewq, who I’ll confess I cannot stand, and the high
sezar himself — have battlefield command. My Lord Warmaster Macaroth himself made it clear we were here to
support the Alliance, not take command from them. Our hands are tied.”
“Then men will die, sir,” said Gaunt.
“They will. We are obliged to fight this war at the Alliance’s pace, to the Alliance’s rules, and following the
Alliance’s traditions. Aexegary and its allies are desperate to retain control of the fight. No offence, count.”
Golke shrugged. “I’m with you on that, lord general. I tried to change things for years. Tried to modernise tactics
and strategy. The simple fact is that Aexegary has a long and illustrious martial history. They will not admit, not ever,
that they are capable of losing a war. Aexegary never has, you see. And especially against an old foe like the
Shadik.”
“The Alliance won’t admit they are fighting a modem foe,” said Biota quietly. “They will not accept that the
Shadik Republic has changed, been corrupted, that it is no longer the neighbouring power Aexegary has bested in
five wars.”
“And the Alliance members don’t see it either?” asked Gaunt.
“No,” said Golke. “Kottmark especially. They see their entry into the war as an opportunity to prove their worth
on the world stage.”
“Pride,” said Gaunt. “That’s what we’re fighting. Not Shadik. Not the arch-enemy. We’re fighting the pride of the
Alliance.”
“I think so,” said Van Voytz. “Undoubtedly,” said Biota.
“Then I am ashamed of my country,” Golke said sadly. “When the high sezar told me the Guard was coming to
assist us, my heart leapt. Until I saw the look in his eyes.”
“What look?” asked Van Voytz.
“The look that told me he saw you Imperials as brand new toys… toys that he would use in just the same way as
the old ones. I had hoped that the Alliance might learn things from the Guard… new ways of fighting… things like
fluid field orders and unit-level decision making…”
“You’ve been reading your Slaydo,” said Gaunt with a smile.
Golke nodded. “I have. I think I’m the only man on Aexe Cardinal who has. To no avail. The Alliance is still
living in the glory days of the great sezars. They will not change.”
“A dutiful father,” said Biota softly, “is distressed to find his son mourning the death of the family pet, a feline.
The boy complains that he looked after it, groomed it, fed it, and yet it passed away despite his care. Anxious to
please, the father purchases a new pet for his son, a hound. He is horrified when he catches his son pushing the hound
off the balcony of the family house to its death. The son is distressed once more. ‘That pet wouldn’t fly either,’ he
tells his father.” Biota looked around at them. “We are the hound,” he said.
Dawn fog from the Upper Naeme shrouded Meiseq the next morning when Gaunt rose. He had made sure Beltayn
woke him early for the return trip to Rhonforq. While he was shaving in the cold, new light, a messenger arrived and
asked him to attend Lord General Van Voytz.
Van Voytz was taking breakfast in his staff apartments, along with Biota and a small group of aides. At Van Voytz’s
instruction, a steward brought caffeine and fried fish and egg mash for Gaunt, so he could eat with them.
“You’re starting back to Rhonforq today, Ibram?” Van Voytz said, eating heartily. He was dressed in an
embroidered cape and a linen field suit of dark red.
“I’ve been away too long as it is, sir. And you?”
“North. Lyntor-Sewq awaits me at Gibsgatte to address the Northern generals. It’s a mess up there. We’re
deploying our Urdeshi units there tomorrow. I’ve good news for you, however.”
“Sir?”
Van Voytz dabbed his mouth with his napkin and munched, taking a sip of fruit juice. “Well, it was good news until
five-thirty this morning. Then it simply became interesting.”
“Go on.”
“Our friend Count Golke has been working his influence on the Alliance GSC planners for the last few days, and
after last night’s dinner it paid off. The First is to be reassigned, in keeping with their scouting abilities. Right over
to the west, an area called… what is it, Biota?”
“The Montorq Forest, sir.”
“That’s it. Orders will follow. But you’ve got your way. The Tanith will be used to its strength at last. Don’t let me
down.”
“I won’t, sir.”
“Me or Golke. It was the devil’s effort to convince them.”
“What’s the interesting part, sir?” Gaunt asked.
Van Voytz paused, chewing, and emptied his mouth. Then he picked up his glass. “Come with me, Ibram.”
Van Voytz led Gaunt out onto a verandah overlooking the river. The landscape below them was barred with chalky
mist.
“There’s a rider,” Van Voytz said. “Golke talked your mob up, emphasising how terrific they were as stealth scouts
so the GSC would agree to reassign them. Trouble is, he may have talked them up too well. They’ve taken the idea to
heart. Suddenly, they like the idea of scouts. They see uses of their own.”
“Right and what does that mean?”
“It’s a give and take thing, Ibram. Fifty per cent of your force gets to scout the Montorq Woods. In return for that,
the other half gets deployed into the Pocket.”
“The Pocket?”
“The Seiberq Pocket. Front line. Their job is to penetrate the Shadik defences and locate… and maybe disable…
these new super-siege guns. They reckon if you’re so good at recon…”
“Feth!” said Gaunt. “There’s a word for a deal like that.”
“I know. ‘Ironic’, I think it is. I’m pretty sure Martane and Ankre had something to do with it. Give and take. You
get to play to your strengths in the west… provided you show the same skills at the blunt end. I’m sorry, Ibram.”
“Sorry? I play the odds, my lord. All of my men on the front or half of them.”
“Good lad. One hand gives, one hand takes, as Solon used to say.”
Overnight bag in hand and his mind full of troubles, Gaunt walked out of the military hall into the Meiseq sunlight. It
was 08.30. Imperial personnel threaded between the Alliance sentries as they loaded Van Voytz’s transports.
Gaunt looked around for Beltayn and the car. He found only Beltayn.
“What’s up? Where’s the car?”
“It’s really weird, sir. Something’s awry. I think the car’s been stolen.”
“Stolen?”
“It’s not where we parked it.”
Gaunt put his bag down. “Give me the keys, then. I’ll find it.” Beltayn grimaced. “That’s the other weird part, sir. I
can’t find the keys either.”
“Feth! What’ll I tell her?”
“The old woman?”
“Yes, the old wo—”
Gaunt sighed. “Don’t bother, let’s not waste any more time. Scare us up some transport… or at least get us tickets
on the next southbound train.”
Beltayn nodded and hurried away.
“A problem, colonel-commissar?”
Gaunt turned and found Biota behind him.
“Nothing much, nothing I can’t deal with.”
Biota did up the neck clasps of his red, tactical division body-glove and nodded.
“That story last night. About the feline and the hound. Very pertinent. Very sharp,” said Gaunt.
“I can’t presume credit,” Biota said, off-hand. “One of DeMarchese’s fables.”
Biota walked away towards the waiting vehicles.
“Tactician Biota! A moment!”
“Gaunt?”
“DeMarchese? You said DeMarchese. Who is that?” Biota paused. “A minor philosopher. Very minor. You know
the name?”
“I’ve heard it.”
“DeMarchese served as an advisor to Kiodrus, who in turn stood at the right hand of the bead during the First
Crusade. His contribution is rather eclipsed by Faltomus, who was the real architect of Saint Sabbat’s strategy, but
still his homely fables have some merit. Gaunt? What is it?”
“Nothing,” said Gaunt. “Nothing.” He looked up at the pale sun and then said, “Elinor Zaker. Does that name mean
anything to you?”
“Elinor Zaker?”
“Of the Adepta Sororitas Militant, the order of Our Martyred Lady?” Biota shook his head.
“All right. Never mind. Good luck at Gibsgatte. May the Emperor protect.”
Gaunt walked off to find Beltayn. He had seldom felt so uneasy. He had finally identified the pervasive flowerscent
from the previous day.
Islumbine. The sacred flower of Hagia.
SEVEN
POACHING
“And this, my friends, is what they call sweet.”
—Murtan Feygor
The forest beckoned.
They could smell it. From Ins Arbor, coming off the transports, they could see it. Rolled like green fur around the
uplands east of them. Big. Silent. Inscrutable.
It wasn’t as if the Tanith hadn’t seen forest since the Founding. There’d been plenty. The thick rainwoods north of
Bhavnager, the tropical groves of Monthax, the Voltemand Mirewoods. But there was something about this forest,
something temperate, old and cool, that reminded them all achingly of the lost nalwoods.
Ins Arbor was a shabby dump of a town, ill-supplied and stinking in the summer heat. There were no proper
billets, virtually no water, and the worst rations they’d yet experienced.
But morale had improved overnight.
The forest beckoned.
Corbec could see the renewed spirit in the faces of the men around the camp. He sat back on the fender of a halftrack,
and made a last few adjustments to squad lists he was drawing up. Each ten-man detail needed a good mix of
scouts and fireteam, and Hark had requested Corbec spread the scout-trainees evenly.
Corbec sucked on the big cigar smouldering between his teeth. A gift from Gaunt. He’d been going to save it for a
special occasion, but the smoke was doing a fine job of screening out the odour of the Ins Arbor latrines.
Gaunt’s real gift had been this mission. Half of the First taken out of the Naeme meatgrinder and given something
useful to do. That was what had lifted morale, despite the grim facilities of the staging town. Anything was better
than the line, and the prospect of forest work was better than anything. Tanith were smiling. Verghastites, who had no
special affinity with woodland, were smiling too, simply lifted by the mood and the last minute reprieve from trench
postings.
He called Varl over and sent him to round up the troops for the first details.
The forest beckoned.
Brostin kept going on about it. Thuggish, brutal, tattooed, one of the most barbarian of all the enlisted Tanith, he
would not shut up about the wonder of it all.
“Smell that!” he said. He paused, cocking his head, wistful. “Not the leaves. The smell of wet earth beneath trees.
Hmm-mm.”
“All I smell is your gakking p-tanks, Tanith,” Cuu said Idly.
“You’ve got no soul, Cuu. No soul at all.”
“So they say, sure as sure.”
“Here’s an idea,” said Feygor, his voice a quiet hiss through his throat-box. “Why don’t the two of you shut up?”
Brostin shrugged and smiled, and picked up his sloshing fuel tanks again. Cuu melted away into the bracken.
Feygor raised his right hand and swept the fingers round twice in a paddling motion. The members of nineteen
detail fanned forward through the underbrush.
It was late afternoon. The sun was a yellow dapple to the west behind the leaf cover. The glades of the forest were
misty hollows pillared by black trunks. Wild birds called aloud through the wood spaces, and the air smelled of
damp bark, wood-poppy and beythorn.
Nineteen detail had been out now for three hours, having left the company command at Ins Arbor with the other
details after Corbec’s briefing. On the hike up through the villages, the details had separated, one by one, each
striking off towards their own designated patrol. Nineteen had been ordered to sweep the Bascuol Valley as far as
the pass road down to Frergarten. Two, maybe three days, out and back. They’d made decent time, moving in
country. A gentle stroll into the woods.
“I thought Brostin was born and raised in the slums of Tanith Magna,” whispered Caffran.
Gutes shrugged. “Me too. I guess even the city-boys amongst us get sentimental once in a while.”
Caffran nodded. He didn’t begrudge Brosrin’s enthusiasm. These were dark pine woods, the nearest thing to
Tanith they’d experienced since the loss. The spark of recognition he himself had felt at the landing zones was
magnified here. Forest. Trees. Aexe Cardinal felt enough like home to please him.
The Verghastites in the detail were less settled. Muril and Jajjo, children of the hive, were jumping at shadows,
moving their weapons to cover every last mysterious creak and crack the forest made.
“Cool it down,” Caffran whispered to Muril as she snapped round, her lasrifle aimed.
“Easy for you to say, tree-boy,” she said. “This is spooky.”
Feygor raised his hand to signal a stop and turned back to face his scout-team.
“Feth!” he said, “I’ve heard quieter beer-dances! Could we act professionally? Could we?”
They nodded.
“And tell me…” Feygor added, “isn’t this better than slogging it at the front?”
“Yes, Mister Feygor,” they all agreed. “Good. Excellent. Now come on.” Feygor turned and walked smack into
Mkvenner.
“Feth me backwards! Ven! Damn!”
Mkvenner looked at Feygor dourly. He had no love for Rawne’s adjutant. A speck of feth, if you pressed him for
an opinion, and few dared.
“Way’s clear,” Mkvenner said. “Through to the big oak at the dip. Want me to spread forward?”
“Yeah, why don’t you do that?” Feygor said, recovering his composure. “And take one of the fething wannabes.
That’s the idea of this, isn’t it?”
“So I’m told,” said Mkvenner. He glanced back at the spread out members of the detail. “Trooper Jajjo! Front to
me!”
Jajjo tumbled forward to join the lean, scary Tanith scout. Jajjo was one of the few Verghasts to show potential as
a scout.
“Ahead and low, fan south. Calls are standard,” Mkvenner said to the eager Jajjo. “Go!”
Mkvenner and Jajjo forked away ahead of the detail. Feygor kept his eyes on them. He could still see Jajjo’s
creeping, hunched shape after two minutes. Mkvenner had vanished almost immediately.
Rerval made a vox-check to make sure they were still in range. He looked up and saw Muril with a grim
expression on her face.
“What’s up, Verghast?” he said.
“Nothing. Nothing…” she answered. Rerval shrugged. He knew what was bothering her. Muril and Jajjo had both
signed up for scout training, and this tour in the woods was meant to be their proving ground. So far, only Jajjo had
benefited from Mkvenner’s expertise and tutoring.
It’s a female thing, Rerval thought. Just like Rawne, though I’d never have expected that kind of prejudice from
Ven.
“Let’s pick it up!” Feygor called back down the line. “Moving on!”
They advanced, spread out, through the dim forest space: Feygor, Gutes, Brostin, Muril, Caffran, Cuu.
Cuu paused to look back at the tenth and final member of the detail.
“You with us?”
“Sure,” said Hlaine Larkin. “Sure as sure.”
Feygor was pretty pleased with himself. He’d made the cut into what had become known as the “lucky half of the
First”, and now here he was with command of a foot patrol. Minimal effort, a little walk-and-look job, and open
ended. And if they found somewhere nice, maybe an old farm or something, then a two-day patrol might turn itself
into three or four days of R and R.
He’d have preferred to pick his own detail. Nineteen was a mixed bag, but Brostin, Rerval and Gutes were okay,
Cuu had his moments, and Caff was all right in his way. Larks was a nut, but what else was new? He could shoot.
Maybe he’d bag them something for supper. Feygor acknowledged to himself that he had no idea what sort of
wildlife lived out here, but he was pretty sure there would be something with a mouth at one end, an arse at the other,
and decent eating in between.
The Verghasts he could do without. Jajjo was a stiff, and in Feygor’s opinion, no Verghast was ever going to cut it
as a scout. It wasn’t in the genes. The girl was better. Decorative. Maybe he’d get really lucky and bag another kind
of game out here in the wild woods.
The real pain was Ven. Sure, Feygor respected the scout, everyone did. But everyone was afraid of Mkvenner too.
He was straight as a die. Feygor knew he’d have to plan very carefully if they were going to have any fun without
Ven getting in the way.
Of course, there was meant to be a job to do, too. The Montorq Forest covered upwards of three thousand square
kilometres and ran down from the Toyre, bearding the west-em flanks of the Kottmark Massif, a wall of mountains
that split the eastern provinces of Aexegary from Kottmark. Most of the Montorq terrain was steep, thick woodland
slopes, pretty much impassible unless you were on foot or had time to scout out a decent track.
The Shadik Republic lay to the north. The nominal border was about eighty kilometres away, beyond the
headwaters of the Toyre. During the long years of the war, Shadik had pressed Aexegary and Kottmark along all
viable routes, gradually establishing the pattern of the front line. Seen on a tactical map, the forest uplands were the
one break in that line. West of them lay the Seronne Line, the Naeme Sectors and Meiseq, tight as a drum. North and
east, the so-called Ostlund Shield Line that blocked the Shadik thrusts into Kottmark. Shadik had never touched
Montorq. It had been spared the war because of geography. Just a few hours’ walking in the skirts of the forest
showed how hard the going would be. Only a fool would try and push an army through the forest. Feygor had heard
the Republican commanders called a lot of things, but fool wasn’t one of them.
However, times change. The Alliance had become concerned with the idea that Shadik was about to change tactics
in an attempt to throw the deadlock. Instead of directly assaulting Frergarten, the Alliance’s great eastern bastion,
they might push elite infantry with light support down through the Montorq, and encircle Frergarten, achieving by
stealth where three previous assaults had failed. They could take Frergarten, Ins Arbor, snap the Seronne Line and be
marching into the Eastern Provinces in under six weeks.
It was unlikely, but it was possible. The Ghosts’ orders were to assess enemy disposition and communication
routes in the Montorq area. To bring early warning, if necessary. And, Corbec had suggested during the briefing,
work out the feasibility of the Alliance pulling the trick in reverse. By the autumn, maybe an Alliance force would be
heading through the forest, marching north…
Feygor didn’t care. He didn’t actually care who won, who lost. He wouldn’t give a feth if the Shadik President
came along and took a dump in the high sezar’s ear. Just as long as Feygor was left alone. He was tired. It had been a
long fething road from Tanith, and they’d been through plenty.
Rawne always said that Gaunt led them like he had something to prove. Well, they’d fething well proved it
enough, hadn’t they? It was some other bastard’s turn. Maybe when they were done with this feth-hole, the First
would get rotated back to regimental reserve for a few months. Six, maybe. A year. Feygor had seen other companies
get the call back out. The fething Vitrians, for instance. They’d gone back into crusade reserve about eighteen months
earlier and as far as Feygor knew they were still there, sitting with their fething glass boots up on a table, smoking
someone else’s lhos, playing at garrison. The Bluebloods too, those bastards had been pulled to the rear after
Vervunhive. There was no fething justice.
Feygor reached the next crest, a slope of loose rocks and ferns that bounded a deep dell where a thin stream
splashed down its course under the dark trees. The trees, mountain ash, link-alder and some kind of spruce, creaked
and moved their heads gently. A slight rise in the wind. Westerly. The scent of rain.
On one of the rocks lay a leaf, fresh, curled into a loop with the stalk stabbed through the blade of the leaf. Feygor
picked it up. One of Ven’s waymarkers. All the scouts left marks like this to show the squad behind them they’d
cleared and passed ahead. You wouldn’t notice them unless you knew to look. Ven and Jajjo would be half a
kilometre ahead of them by now.
As the detail made their way up the fern trail behind him, Feygor pushed on, clambering up the tumble of rocks on
the crest into a break in the trees where the sunlight could fall on him. The sky was tinged yellow, what he could see
of it. Clouds chased, gathering. Rain definitely. Maybe even a summer storm.
Feygor knew the signs. Like Brostin — and like his mentor Rawne — Feygor was a city boy. But even if you grew
up in a place like Tanith Attica, you were never far from forest. Feygor had got to know woodcraft and how to read
the weather as a teenager, making the early morning runs out of Attica’s mercantile district into the African woods.
You’d needed the skills in his trade. Skills to find a particular clearing at a particular time, skills to get home the
long way round without getting lost. Skills to avoid the arbites and the excise men. The movers and shakers in
Attica’s black market didn’t go much on excuses like “I got lost” or “There was a sudden downpour and I ran late”.
Feygor sat down and waited as the members of the detail came up over the crest. Cuu, then Caff, then Gutes and
Rerval. Brostin came back in the line, so that the betraying smell of his flamer’s fuel tanks would be minimised.
Muril next quiet as a feline. Feygor watched her move by, his gaze lingering once she’d gone past and afforded him a
rear view.
Larkin was right in the tail. According to Brostin, Larkin had specifically requested this detail, which seemed odd
to Feygor. Everyone knew that Larkin and Cuu were not exactly best buddies. Larks usually did his level best to find
occupation as far away from Lijah Cuu as possible. Indeed, Cuu had seemed puzzled by Larkin’s inclusion. Puzzled.
Almost annoyed.
But Larkin seemed strangely relaxed. That was good, in Murtan Feygor’s book. The last kind of crap he needed
out here was Larks in one of his manic phases. He’d keep an eye on the sniper. He’d asked Piet Gutes to do the same.
Feygor got up and slithered back down the crest to join Larkin as he made the top.
“Gonna be looking for shelter soon,” Feygor said. “Wind’s up. Would be good to eat. Fancy your eye?”
Larkin shrugged. “Why not?”
“Don’t go far.” Feygor looked back down the trail. “Muril!”
She turned and made her way back to them.
“Larks is on dinner duty. Buddy him up. Don’t get lost.”
“Okay,” she said. The order clearly pleased her. Half an hour poaching with Larkin wasn’t scout training with
Ven, but it was better than nothing. Feygor knew she was itching to show her ability. Anything to get in her good
books.
“I saw some spoor down on the path,” Larkin said. “Let’s try that way.”
The pair of them began to descend the slope the way they’d come.
Feygor moved ahead, catching up with the rest of the detail. Brostin had stopped to take a swig from his billy.
Right at the front, coming up the next rise in the shadow of the trees, Cuu had paused too. He was staring back down
the dell at the departing figure of Larkin.
Larkin knelt and checked the spoor. It was fresh. Some small animal, probably a grazer. He sat on a rock for a
moment, exchanging his hot-shot ammunition clip for a low-volt pack.
“What’s that?” Muril asked.
“You hunted before?”
She shook her head.
“A hot-shot’ll mince anything smaller than a deer. We wanna eat. We don’t wanna paint the scenery with liquid
animal.”
She smiled. She sat down and put her lasrifle on the earth beside her. Larkin had got used to seeing her with a
long-las. It seemed odd for her to be carrying a standard Mark III carbine.
“Miss it?” he asked.
“Sort of,” she admitted. “But I want to be a scout. I really want to make that grade. And that means packing in my
beloved long-las for a standard Mark III. Besides, I get the hat as compensation.”
She was referring to the soft, black wool cap she was wearing. Standard kit order for troopers was the ceramite
helmet for line duties, and a choice of black beret or forage cap otherwise. Unless you were a scout, or a trainee
scout like Muril. Then you got to wear the wool cap for all duties. It didn’t obstruct movement or vision like a
helmet, and there was no danger of it clinking against your weapon during a crawl. The caps were the mark of the
First’s elite, one of those subtle but crucial uniform differences that lent prestige. If she made scout, she’d get to
wear the matt-black speciality badge on the brim. No Verghast had done that. No woman, either.
Larkin smiled. Whatever standard kit order said about headwear, the First was extraordinarily lax about it. Many
went bare-headed. Berets were common under fire. He’d once heard Corbec tell Hark that more Ghosts had used
their hard-bowls as buckets than had worn them in combat. Here was this girl keen to win the right to wear a hat
she’d probably never use anyway.
Except, of course, on parade. That’s where it would matter. That’s where Sehra Muril in a scout cap would be a
fething big deal.
“What’s funny?” she asked.
“Nothing,” he said.
He got up and practised sighting his long-las into the trees. “You don’t think I’ll make it?” she said. He shrugged.
“You made marksman. I know this. If any of you hivers ever make scout, it’ll be one of you girls.”
“Mkvenner doesn’t seem keen on the idea,” she muttered. “When the colonel told me he’d put me in this detail to
shadow Ven, I got really excited. I mean, Ven’s the real deal. Him or Mkoll. The very best. I thought this was it. The
big step forward. But he only seems interested in Jajjo.”
“Jajjo’s okay.”
“Sure. But Jajjo’s getting all the attention. Who did Ven call up just now? Me? I don’t think so. Did I do something
wrong? Or am I fooling myself? Or does Ven have a thing?”
“A thing?”
“About girls.”
Larkin lowered his weapon and squinted over at her. “We all have a thing about girls.” Muril laughed. “But
really…”
Larkin raised his weapon again. Distantly, through the trees, he could see the members of nineteen detail skirting
up the next slope under a bank of spruce.
“It ever occur to you,” he said softly, “that Ven’s taking time with Jajjo because Jajjo’s the one who needs the
work?”
“Gak!” she said. A broad smile spread across her slender face. “That’s a way of looking at it that hadn’t occurred
to me.”
“You gotta see all the angles…” Larkin said. His voice had dropped to a hush. He let the las float in his hands, the
aim fluid. He coasted the muzzle around. He wasn’t blinking. Through the sight, he saw the distant figures, crossing
in and out of the leaf-cover. He waited for the scope to lock. The read-out lit up in his eye. Target-fix. Four hundred
and seventy two metres. The back of Feygor’s head. Coast. Target-fix. Four seventy-nine and half. Brostin’s
promethium tanks. Coast.
“Four eighty-one. Target-fix. Lijah Cuu. Side of the skull. Adjusted for cross-wind. Tracking. What are you
doing?” Muril asked.
Larkin had stopped breathing. The long-las felt weightless. The target-fix rune was flashing steady now. His right
index finger slowly tightened on the trigger. Lijah Cuu stopped and turned to speak to Gutes. The horizontal of
Larkin’s cross hairs made a bar across Cuu’s eyes. The vertical almost followed the line of the trademark scar. Right
there. Right now. Kill-shot.
Larkin lowered the gun, breathed out and snapped the safety.
“Just getting my eye in,” he said.
Heqta Jajjo couldn’t get the gakking leaf to bend. Every time he looped it, it sprang back, and when he’d finally got
the stalk pushed through the leaf, it tore. “Problem?” said a voice.
Jajjo looked up. Mkvenner was standing over him. “Gak, you made me jump.”
“That’s a good thing because I’m a scout. And it’s a bad thing because that’s what you want to be too.”
“Sorry.”
“Don’t be sorry. Be better. What’s the problem?”
“You told me to leave a sign here. I can’t get it to make the shape.”
Ven hunkered down and plucked a fresh leaf from a nearby clump of beythorn. “You’re trying too hard. It’s just a
twist. It has to look casual.”
Mkvenner made a perfect loop and set it on a crop of white stone.
Jajjo sighed.
“You’ll get it,” said Mkvenner, almost encouragingly. “You think we’re wasting our time, don’t you?” said Jajjo.
“Why?”
“Because we’re not fit. Not fit for scouting.” Jajjo didn’t have to qualify the “we’re”. They both knew he meant
Verghastites.
“If that’s what you think, then the only thing I’m wasting is my effort. Take the point.”
“Only if—”
“Take the point Jajjo. Show me you can work terrain.”
Jajjo picked up his Mark III, and advanced, head low They’d reached a long, curved valley of pine wood with a
steeply tilted rake that was thick with last year’s needles. The wind was up now, and the trees swayed and shushed
over him.
The air was cold. The sunlight had died off and plunged the forest floor into twilight. Jajjo tried to make as little
sound as possible. His foot cracked a piece of dead bark, and he looked back guiltily towards the place where he’d
left Mkvenner.
The scout had gone. How the gak did he do that?
Jajjo worked the cover all the way down to a thick copse of link-alder. Halfway down, he knocked his rifle-stock
against a sapling. Then he realised he hadn’t draped himself with his camo-cape properly. Gak on a flakboard, was
there anything else he could get wrong?
The sound of the wind in the trees was mesmeric now. Like a sea, Jajjo thought. His family had come from
Imjahive originally, down in the archipelago, one of Verghast’s tropical cities. He knew what the sea sounded like.
He’d missed it when his family had moved to Vervunhive, the year he turned six.
Jajjo stole past the copse, and crossed a spread of swishing ferns. The first spots of rain started to come down,
smacking hard impacts into the leaves of the ground cover. Jajjo tried to stick to the shadows. Through the stand of
pines ahead, there seemed to be something, he couldn’t tell what. He switched cover, making short runs between
trees, the way he’d been taught in scout preparation. Now the sounds he made were being masked by the gathering
rainstorm and wind. He kept his Mark III tucked up under his right armpit barrel down, so it wouldn’t catch on
anything.
The rain got heavier. The drops beat down like a non-stop drum roll on the leaves. The temperature immediately
rose by a few degrees, lifting skeins of mist from the ground and choking his nose with a damp, mulchy reek.
Jajjo reached the pine stand, and slid through the trees. What the hell was that up there? There was definitely some
sort of clearing. A break in the trees. He could tell that simply from the light.
He got down in the ferns and crawled for the last twenty metres to the edge of the clearing, pushing his weapon in
front of him. He raised his head, and saw, through the rain, what lay beyond.
“Gak!” he stammered. He turned to rise and work back, but Mkvenner was crouched right behind him.
“Good work,” said Mkvenner quietly. “Look what you found…”
It wasn’t on any of the maps. Mainly because it was old, and the maps were new. Ven and Jajjo back-tracked to meet
the detail, and led them forward.
It was a house. A big house. A retreat. Rerval described it as a manse, and the name stuck. Derelict and
overgrown, it occupied a cleared stretch of hillside within the forest, facing west. Lime-washed grey stone, black
slate. Two storeys and maybe an attic. Blind windows looked out across an unkempt garden from the front. There
was a weed-choked path leading to the front porch, and the signs of an old wall and gate in the overgrown hedges.
Gutes and Caffran circled round the rear and found a single-storey wing extending from the back, and a clutch of
outbuildings clogged against the back garden wall around a paved yard. Beyond that, a wild garden and lawn
stretched up hill to the edge of the pine woods. There was an old wall at the top of the lawn, against which sat
several more dilapidated outhouses.
The rain was torrential now.
“Let’s check it,” Feygor said.
They split. Feygor, Gutes, Cuu and Brostin to the front door; Caffran, Rerval, Jajjo and Mkvenner to the back.
“Armed,” Feygor said on the front steps. The dripping Ghosts with him nodded. Gutes and Cuu dropped in either
side of the big, old doors. Paint was flaking off the panels. Feygor peeked in through ground floor windows, but saw
nothing except dust and shadows.
“Going in,” he said over his micro-bead.
“Read you,” crackled Caffran.
Feygor nodded. Brostin stepped up and put his shoulder into the doors. It took two shoves, but the wood splintered
and the doors swung open.
Gutes and Cuu, lasrifles aimed, screwed in behind him.
The hallway was dark and the air was stale. Mildew. Old carpets. Damp. They edged into the gloom, making out a
staircase and several doors off the hall on the ground floor. Water dripped from the ceiling and the stairwell. Feygor
crept inside, his rifle at a hunting tilt.
He snapped his fingers and he, Gutes and Cuu turned on lamp-packs. They slung them from the bayonet lugs of
their weapons and played them around the hall. The spots of light revealed a lacquered sideboard with cobwebstrung
candle stands, a massive gilt-edged mirror that threw their inquisitive lights back at them. A coatstand, hung
with a single, lonely raincoat. An embroidered rug. Dried flowers in a dedemican vase. A console table with a brass
letter rack.
Cuu tried the wall switch. The big chandelier remained dark. “No power,” he said.
“Yeah,” Feygor smiled, but it’s a roof.
The rain pelted down. Thunder rolled. Feygor worked his way over to the left hand door off the hall.
Brostin hand-cranked the feeder reservoir of his flamer’s broom, and clicked the lighter flint. There was a wet
cough, and then a hiss as the flamer came to life. Brostin had it turned right down, so that just a cone of blue-heat
sizzled around the nozzle. The hiss of the burner filled the air. They could all smell promethium.
Brostin edged his way over to Feygor, using the barely-lit flamer like a lamp. “After you,” he said.
Feygor opened the inner door and pushed it wide, keeping his back to the doorpost. Brostin went in, revving the
flamer up into little, quick flares of hot yellow flame.
“Dining room,” he said. Feygor prowled in, sliding his lamp beam off the walls. Old oil paintings, grim faces.
Vases and porcelain. A long, dark-varnished table lined by twenty chairs. A single plate at one setting, decorated
with a pair of fruit stones, and a small paring knife.
Feygor went back out into the hall. Gutes and Cuu had opened the room on the other side. Some kind of sitting
room, with armchairs and sofas covered in dust sheets. A big fireplace with a basket of logs. More cobwebs.
Feygor moved through the space to another door at the end. He pushed it open, aiming his lamp and gun through the
slit. A small room, lined with empty shelves. Dust. A library? A study? He edged inside, covered by Gutes. There
was a desk and a captain’s chair on brass castors. Racks and hooks on the walls that had once held something. He
swung his beam right.
Framed by his light-beam, the monster loomed out of the darkness, its lips pulled back from its huge teeth, its
clawed paws raised to strike.
“Holy feth!” squeaked Feygor and shot it.
He hit it in the belly and there was a loud burst of fur and dust. Gutes, startled by the sudden shot, rolled round
through the doorway and blasted off a burst himself.
“Stop! Stop!” Feygor shouted over Gutes’ fire. The monster continued to snarl at them. The micro-bead link went
wild.
“Who’s shooting?” That was Caffran.
“Confirm contact! Confirm contact!” Jajjo.
“Feygor? Sign back.” Ven.
Feygor was laughing, his giggles rolling flat and dry from his voice box. “Relax. No contact.”
Gutes was sniggering with relief too.
“What the feth?” said Brostin, shouldering in through the door and raising his flamer. He gunned the torch and the
flare lit up the room. The huge beast in the corner was starkly lit, poised on its plinth, paws raised to strike. Sawdust
dribbled from its shot-open gut, and the flames reflected in its glass eyes.
“Feth!” said Brostin. “Are you trigger-happy or what?”
“I thought it was a real fething thing!” Feygor protested and chortled. “Took me by surprise.”
“Well,” said Brostin, “you pair sure killed it.”
Feygor walked over to the stuffed trophy. It was quite a beast. Raised on its hind legs, three metres tall, covered in
black fur and sporting teeth the length of his fingers.
“What the feth is it?” asked Piet Gutes.
“Some kind of ursa,” said Feygor, truculently punching it in the chest. It was hollow.
“It’s a behj,” said Cuu, from the doorway. “Big deal here on Aexe. The totem animal, the king predator. I heard the
sezar wears a pelt, and the locals barter the claws as lucky charms.”
“How the feth d’you know that, Lijah?” asked Brostin.
Cuu smiled. “I made a cred or two playing the trench markets. It always helps to have local knowledge. A struthid
feather is lucky, but a behj-claw—”
“Always got your eye on the main chance, eh, Cuu?” admired Feygor.
“Sure as sure,” said Lijah Cuu.
Caffran had led his team into the back kitchen. “Odd,” Mkvenner said. “What is?”
“Everything’s clean and put away… except that cup and dish by the sink.”
“Someone left in a hurry,” said Rerval. “This whole region is supposed to have been evacuated.”
“Then why do I smell garlic?” Ven asked.
Aiming his lamp beam into the shadows, Caffran edged through the scullery and an empty, damp-smelling
washroom. Jajjo followed him.
Jajjo found a door off the kitchen that came free with a lack. It was a walk-in pantry, the shelves lined with fruit
pickles and jars of preserved vegetables. Four haunches of salted meat hung from the beam hooks.
“Gak me, my mouth is watering,” said Jajjo. They’d been on lousy rations since landfall.
The vox chimed.
“Come see what I’ve found, boys,” said Feygor.
Caffran’s team found Feygor’s in the cellar of the house. A short ran of stone steps let down into it via a door in the
hall. Labelled by vintage, the wine racks were arranged in five rows of shelves.
Feygor took a bottle off one of the racks, cracked its neck off against the cellar wall, and splashed a large measure
into his upturned mouth.
“Gutes, Cuu,” he said, belching and licking his lips. “Go light the fire. Stoke it up, mind. We’ve found our billet.”
“We should secure it,” said Mkvenner.
“Okay, so secure it,” Feygor snapped. They could all hear the wind and rain beating down outside. “Do what you
want.”
Mkvenner glared at Feygor for a moment. Then he turned to Jajjo. “Come on.”
The pair of them left the cellar.
Feygor took another knock from the bottle and glanced over at Caffran. “It ain’t sacra,” he said,
“but I think I’m gonna like it here.”
EIGHT
THE POCKET
“The worst day of my life. The worst part of the line. I wouldn’t wish it on any bastard. I don’t ever want to go
back there.”
—Count Golke, on the Seiberq Pocket
In silence, they waited until the guns had stopped. Then they went out. Up over scaling ladders, up over the parapet.
Into the blackness and the mud. Into little, individual worlds of suffocating gas-hoods.
It was just before 03.30 in the morning, and day seemed a whole lifetime away.
“Keep it tight,” Criid granted into her micro-bead, the sound of her own breathing resonating inside her canvas
gas-mask. Her platoon was straggled out. Somewhere to their left was five platoon, Soric’s band. Somewhere to her
right was seventeen, Raglon’s. Somewhere around her was her own gakking platoon, not that she could see them. The
damn hoods: blindfolds, gags, earmuffs all rolled into one.
There was a kind of light. It twinkled through the imperfect plastic lenses of her hood. Amber, dull. Just enough to
pick out the landscape of no-man’s land. Smoggy vapour fumed from the craters. It hid the wires. Pools of chemical
water in deep shell holes gave off a leery phosphorescent glow.
This was a game. Not a fun one. Nobody had been looking forward to it. Not since they’d been transferred to 58th
sector.
Criid missed having DaFelbe with her. Word was he was recovering from the face wound. She’d had to move
Mkhef up as her adjutant, and she didn’t get on with the lanky Tanith as well.
The ground was wet and sticky. It was like striding through caramel. All she could hear was the muffled pant of
her own lungs inside the hood.
“Wire!” said a muffled voice. She turned her head. It was Mkhef, waiting while Kenfeld and Vulli came up with
the cutters.
Criid crouched down. All around her, anonymous, hooded ghosts were slipping in, just shadows in the bad light.
Everyone was cloaked up, shrouded in their camouflage capes.
“Breached!” Kenfeld reported, his voice sounding like it came from a box. He stood up, pulling the broken strands
of wire aside with his gloved hands.
“Move up, with me,” Criid whispered.
Barely fifty metres to Criid’s left Soric guided his platoon ahead. Despite the proximity, he couldn’t see any of
Criid’s bunch, or Obel’s, which was allegedly running to his left flank.
Agun Soric was sweating inside his hood. He hated hood work. He was blind and stifled, his already reduced
vision cut down to a pathetic scrap.
The mud was hell. Wet-soft and deep. It sucked at boots, pulled feet down at every stride, like the earth was
hungry. Soric had to pause to cover Trooper Hefron, who hadn’t secured his boots well enough and had therefore
lost one to the grab of the ground.
“Get your gakking boot back on!” Soric barked, panting in the humid darkness of his hood. “I’m sorry, sarge, I’m
sorry…” Hefron was repeating.
“Shut up and get it tied!” Soric stood back, trying to let his lungs fill. All he could taste was damp, hot air.
Perspiration was running into his one good eye. He couldn’t wipe it.
“Gak!”
Hefron got back up and Soric sent him on his way with a cuff to the back of the head. He’d gone a pace or two
himself when he tripped on something hard buried in the muck and went down.
Liquid mud drowned his hood’s visor. He couldn’t see. He could taste filthy water pouring in through the gauze
filter. Hands grabbed him and pulled him up. “Sarge? You okay?”
It was Vivvo, his voice crackling over the link. “Yeah.”
“You hit?”
“No. I fell.”
“Gak, I thought you were hit.”
“Wipe me gakking eye slits, for god’s sake,” Soric said. There was a squeak and vision returned. Vivvo was
scooping the mud from Soric’s hood-lenses with his fingers. “You hurt?” he asked.
“No. Yes, bruised my leg. Fell on something.” It was even harder to breathe now. Soric had never felt so stifled.
The infernal hood…
“Give me a moment, Vivvo. Step on. Get the platoon focused before they ran too far ahead.”
Soric trudged forward, feeling his leg for the braise. Something had smacked into it hard when he fell.
There was something in his pocket. Blindly, he took it out and held it up. It was the brass message shell.
Soric’s heart began to race even harder. He was sure he’d left that fething thing in his dugout.
Fumbling with muddy, gloved fists, he unscrewed the cap. There was the folded sheet of blue tissue paper he’d
been expecting.
It was hard to read through the smeared hood visor. It said. “Air’s clean. No need for hoods. Warn ten about mill
house.”
Something else was written underneath that he couldn’t make out.
Soric tore open the buckles and pulled off his hood. He took big lungfuls of the cold exterior air, air thick with the
taste of fuel and mud and water.
But not gas.
He pulled off his gloves and wiped his good eye, shoving the sweat back into his hair. “Signals! Signals!” he
called.
Mohr, his vox-man, came stumbling over the mud-plain towards him and started visibly when he saw Soric
bareheaded.
“Feth, sarge! Orders was hoods!”
“Air’s clean,” Soric told him. “Vox it out. Air’s clean and you have my word on that.”
Mohr knelt down in a shell hole and adjusted his set, removing his gas-hood as he did so. His young face was
flushed and beaded.
“Give me the mic,” said Soric. “This is twenty, twenty to all. The air is clean, repeat, clean. Ditch the hoods.”
Soric sat down, still holding the vox-horn to his mouth. He twisted the paper scrap until the feeble light caught it
so he could read.
“Twenty, ninety-one.”
“Ninety-one, twenty. You certain about the hoods?”
“Certain. Trust me, Tona.”
“Read that, twenty.”
“Twenty, ninety-one. I think you’re coming up on some kind of mill house. A building.”
“Ninety-one, twenty. Not on the maps.”
“There’s nothing on the maps, Tona. Just watch it, okay. You see a structure, be wary.”
“You got inside information, Soric?”
“Just be careful.”
“Ninety-one, twenty. Careful. Confirmed.”
Soric clicked off the mic and sat back for a moment, gazing up. The sky was dark, fumed with a haze of yellow.
There were no stars. He wished there could be stars.
“Finished, sir?” asked Mohr. He was getting anxious. The platoon was leaving them behind.
“Not quite,” said Soric, looking down at the piece of paper clenched in his dirty fist. That line under the first. His
wet fingers had blurred the ink. It was just a smudge. He peered at it What the gak did it say? He ought to know. He’d
gakking written it.
Or something with handwriting just like his had, anyway.
Something, Soric knew, even if it scared the living gak out of him, he had to trust.
Something something don’t let something… what was that? It looked like “Raglon”. Was it? Shit, what had this
said? The first part had been a warning to Tona. Was Raglon going to get into a mess too? God-Emperor, what did it
say?
“Next time write it in gakking pencil!” he said.
“Sarge?” Mohr asked nervously.
I said that out loud, thought Soric. He lifted the vox-mic. “Twenty, two-oh-three?”
“Two-oh-three, twenty.” Raglon’s voice came back swiftly, as prompt on the link as any ex-vox man.
“Twenty, two-oh-three… uh, just watch yourself, okay?”
“Say again, Soric?”
“I said watch yourself. Don’t know why, don’t know what. Just… be extra careful, okay?”
“Understood. Two-oh-three out.”
Soric tossed the mic back to Mohr “Let’s go,” he said, and levered his squat frame up. The mud and darkness
closed in on all sides. There was no sign of Vivvo or the rest of five platoon.
Soric grabbed Mohr by the arm and started to trudge forward.
There was no landscape out here to read in any proper sense. Just burst earth and wreckage. For all Criid knew, they
could be heading back to their own lines. But somehow Hwlan saw the way.
The Tanith scout had the lead, nudging the extended line of ten platoon across the wasteland. At least they had the
relief of losing the hoods. How’d Soric known it was clear? A message from the atmossniffers at the line, Criid
presumed.
The darkness seemed solid, vicing them in. The odour of death and soiled water was almost suffocating. Criid
ducked into a shallow crater with Nessa and Vril, and they found themselves swimming alongside bloated, swollen
corpses.
Mkhef splashed in with them a moment later and recoiled in disgust. “Feth!”
“Shut up, for gak’s sake!” Criid whispered. “We must be getting close to the Shadik lines.”
Nessa crawled up the forward edge of the crater and scoped with her long-las.
“Wire, about twenty metres up. No movement.”
“Feth this,” murmured Mkhef, trying to shoo away a gas-distended corpse that kept bobbing towards him.
The link chimed. Criid heard Hwlan’s voice.
“Got some sort of structure, sarge. Nine points west. Looks like… I dunno…”
“Stay put,” said Criid into her micro-bead.
She hand-signalled over to Nessa, Vril and Mkhef. “With me.”
The four of them scrambled up out of the wet slick of the crater and ran west over the pock-marked mud, ducking
under an old stretch of rusted wire. They came in behind the jagged, partial boarding of a stretch of fence where
Hwlan was hiding in a scrape.
The building beyond was backlit by a yellowish fog rising off the enemy lines. It was a rain, a shell, one wall
gone, the remains of a chimney stack rising like a tombstone. The structure lay in a hollow, swimming with creek
water, festooned with wire. It looked like some kind of… mill. Some kind of water mill.
Criid had an unpleasant nagging feeling left over from Soric’s last transmission.
She glanced up again at the rain, a blankness against the yellowy dark. Caffran had a great rep for building
assaults. What would he do?
The thought stopped her. Caff. Criid felt a terrible ache. Where was he? What was he doing, right now? Was he
even alive?
How fething stupid was this, scampering through darkness and mud with a gun in your hand, when some things
really mattered?
Caff…
“You okay, sarge?” Mkhef whispered.
“Yeah, why?”
“You looked kind of funny—”
“I’m fine,” she said. She was. She was fine. She was Sergeant Tona Criid, Tanith First-and-fething-Only, the only
fern who’d ever made that grade. She wasn’t going to gak it up now. It didn’t matter what she felt about Caff, or
Yoncy or Dalin.
She’d chosen to be a soldier, and worked to get the pins. Love was just an anchor she didn’t need. Not right now.
“Kenfeld?” she said quietly into her bead. “Sarge?” the vox link crackled. “Report?”
“I’m east of you, round the front with Mosark, Pozetine and Lubba.”
“See anything?”
“Just a ruin.”
“Okay, send Lubba forward with Pozetine. Cover space. But wait for my word. We’re going to stealth assault from
this side.”
“Read you, sarge.”
“Stealth assault,” Criid repeated to her companions, removing her blade from her bayonet lug and slinging her
rifle over her shoulder. The others did the same.
“Why the caution, sarge?” Vril asked.
“I’ve got a hunch,” she said. “This could be nasty, but I want it quiet.”
The four of them advanced over the black mud towards the shattered ruin. It was bigger than Criid had first
thought. Tall. Thick walls, what was left of them. She snuggled in behind a fallen section of roof, and waved Hwlan
through. Vril followed him. Criid dropped in behind them, Mkhef at her heels. Nessa hung back, scope raised.
Inside the mill, it was like a cave. Water dripped in through the open roof, and through the punctured second floor
above. The ground was a mess of fractured rockcrete and tumbled girders.
Criid moved forward almost blind through the mess of debris. She climbed up over a slumped girder, tossing her
knife into her left hand to brace herself with her right. To her west, Hwlan crawled forward under a slumped beam,
and then folded himself through a blast hole in what remained of one of the interior walls.
She waited, then heard two, quick taps click through her micro-bead. It was a standard First non-verbal signal
made by gently flicking the mic of your intercom. Two taps… clear.
She edged forward again, trying to fit herself through a narrow gap between rockcrete slabs, but her cape kept
getting hung up on some of the twisted reinforcement bars jutting from one of the slabs. She had to back off, and go
round.
A single tap. Not clear. She froze.
Two taps. She resumed her crawl, moving through a stagnant pool on her hands and knees and then making her way
slowly up a mound of rubble that climbed out of the water, trying hard not to dislodge any loose chunks.
Hwlan was waiting for her at the top in what remained of an old doorway. There was a nondescript dark lump
lying in the shadows near his feet. Criid realised it was the corpse of a Shadik sentry.
They waited until Vril and Mkhef caught up with them, and then went through the doorway into the next portion of
the mined mill. It was very dark here too, but down at the far end, there was a flickering light, like shadows cast by
flames. Then they saw movement. Larger shadows moving against the meagre firelight.
There was a Shadik forward observation post in the far end of the mill. Three, maybe four men in hoods and long,
grey coats moved about the end room. They had a fire, for warmth, in an oil can, its light shielded from the outside.
Hwlan caught at Criid’s arm and directed her attention upwards. Through missing floorboards, they could see
another Shadik up in the remains of the second floor, crouching at a tripod-mounted spotter scope and gazing out over
the wasteland to the west.
They’d never get near him without him noticing them.
Criid signalled the other three to move up, ready to take the Shadik on the ground floor level with their blades.
She unslid her rifle, and took careful aim on the dim figure overhead. She’d have to risk one shot. But it had to be a
good one.
She waited for Hwlan’s signal. She had a good angle. One shot was worth the risk.
Half a kilometre south of the mill, Sergeant Raglon’s platoon had reached the water-logged remains of an old field
trench. There was no sure way of telling which side had constructed it, and certainly no way of knowing why it had
been dug east-west. Once upon a time, its orientation had made some kind of tactical sense.
Raglon was sweating hard, more nervous than he dared admit. He’d seen plenty of combat before, and had brevetled
a unit on Phantine, but this was his first formal command in an active operation.
Raglon was a serious, thoughtful man, determined, just like Criid and Arcuda, the other neophyte sergeants, to
prove to Gaunt and Hark that they’d made a good choice of promotions. He envied Criid the fact that she’d had a
chance to blood her platoon in combat at the line. Then again, he envied Arcuda, who was still waiting in reserve
back at the fire trench. Gaunt had made no bones about the hazards of these scouting raids into the waste. And Raglon
had learned from the Alliance soldiery he’d met that the Seiberq Pocket had a particularly bad reputation as one of
the hardest contested regions of the Peinforq Line.
He signalled his men down into the abandoned trench. At the very least, it offered his platoon a means of pushing
east out of sight.
The trench was littered with dead. Old dead. The unidentifiable remains of men who had fallen out here perhaps
years before, their bodies never recovered. Brown bones stippled the mud like broken twigs.
Seventeen moved single file, heads down, occasionally having to crawl on their bellies to pass sections where the
trench walls had caved and filled the ditch.
Raglon had ordered Lukas, his vox-operator, to rig his set for headphones only, so that the caster wouldn’t
suddenly blare into life and give them away. It was a smart move, the sort of thing that another novice team leader
might have overlooked. But Raglon had come from signals and knew about these things.
Where Raglon lacked experience, it was in character judgement. Since taking command of seventeen, his primary
efforts had been to establish authority. Seventeen had been Lhurn Adare’s platoon, and Raglon was all too aware of
the fact he had nothing of the mourned sergeant’s charisma. He’d just never be popular the way Adare had been.
So he’d decided the best way to run seventeen was to let them function the way they had under Adare. He didn’t
want to mess around with habits and established routines. If seventeen had evolved field practices they were happy
with, who liked to buddy who in fire-teams for instance, he didn’t see the point in changing things. He thought
arbitrary changes would make the platoon resent him, and that was true, up to a point. But some habits stemmed from
sloppiness.
When they reached the dead trench, the men formed a file automatically, as they saw fit, and Raglon didn’t
question it. So it was that they advanced now with Suth, the scout, in the lead, and Costin right behind him. Raglon
fell into place about four men back.
It was his first command error.
Suth was a good scout. Costin, his buddy, was a drunk.
Adare had known that Costin drank too much. He’d tried to keep a lid on it. Costin was a nice guy, despite his
carousing, and a decent trooper if kept away from the sacra. In a situation like this, Costin would inevitably want to
get in beside his friend Suth. Adare would have stopped him, pushed him back down the file, just to be safe.
When Costin moved up eagerly with Suth, Raglon hadn’t thought to object. Everyone knew Costin liked the drink.
Raglon didn’t realise how much Costin had been knocking back since Adare’s death.
The abandoned trench had actually been constructed by the Alliance during an early phase of fighting, before the
full bulk of the Peinforq Line had been built. The Shadik, to whose lines it was now closest, had never filled it in,
because it afforded them excellent cover for raid-teams and wire-cutting parties. Indeed, they had extended its
eastern end into the verges of their own fire trench system.
As Raglon’s platoon advanced along it a raiding squad was coming the other way.
Suth stopped, and signalled back down the line for a halt. He’d heard something, and wanted to check it. “I’m
coming with,” hissed Costin.
Suth shook his head. He could smell the liquor on Costin’s breath. Stay put, he mouthed. Costin was making too
much damn noise.
“Fine!” said Costin, and sat down, glancing back at Azayda, the next man in line with a “what can you do?” shrug.
Angry, Suth took hold of Costin by the jaw and gave him a sharp slap on the cheek. Be quiet! he mouthed, urgently.
Glowering, Costin sat back.
Suth turned, and began to edge forward along the watery swill of the trench pit, then levered himself out of the
trench on his belly and started to crawl.
Costin stared after Suth for a moment, his pride wounded. He wiped his hand across his mouth, and then spat the
slime he’d inadvertently deposited there. It tasted foul.
He leaned up to see how far Suth had got, but the scout was out of sight.
Costin sniffed, and then took a flask bottle out of his fatigue pocket. He took a swig, but it was virtually empty and
he tasted only fumes. So he tipped it back. Tipped it right back to get at the dregs.
The glass bottle flashed as the background light caught it.
Costin wailed as a rifle round exploded his hand and the bottle it was holding. A second later, and another shot
tore open his tunic across the right shoulder.
Costin began to whimper as he fell into the bottom of the trench.
Azayda leapt forward, desperate to quieten Costin, and a third round burst the Verghastite’s head like a ripe fruit.
Back down the line, Raglon heard the cries and the sudden shots, and cursed aloud. He tried to push forward, but
his men were being driven back by furious sniper fire and quick bursts of semi-automatic shooting. Zemel dropped,
killed outright. Tyne took a hit in the knee and another through the arm. Lukas lurched over with a yell as a shot
smashed his vox-caster.
Suth was down, alone, out in the open. He could see the glitter of shots cutting up the trench towards his platoon.
He could see the shapes of the raiders as they hurried forward.
He felt the worst possible feeling a Tanith scout can ever feel: that he had led his comrades into danger.
He didn’t hesitate. He got up, and ran the trench from the side, his lasgun blazing, assaulting the stormers from the
flank.
He made several kills before their massed firepower cut him down.
To the north, Soric’s platoon froze and dropped as they heard the gunfire start up. Agun Soric heard solid fire, and
then las-rounds.
“Gak,” he said, “Some poor bastard’s engaged.”
And though he hated to admit it, he knew for certain who that poor bastard was.
Raglon.
The abrupt gunfire just a half kilometre south startled Criid and made her lower her aim for an instant. She’d been
about to take the gakking shot.
She saw the spotter on the second floor of the mill get up and hurry over to the other side of the building, stepping
expertly over gaps in the planks. She heard voices in the rear room of the obs post.
Do I wait or do I go for it, she asked herself?
She took aim again.
“Bets are off,” she said into her link and fired.
Her shot punched through a floorboard from below and severed the right shin of the spotter. He screamed out, fell,
and came crashing through the rotten planks, bouncing off a jut of girder-post on his way down.
Vril, Mkhef and Hwlan ploughed in, killing the others below with quick, merciless shots.
Criid ran in to join them, ordering the rest of her group to hold position. The sounds of a serious firefight was
rolling in from the south. Vril and Hwlan stood cover as Criid and Mkhef searched the obs post area. Cooking pots,
boxes of ammo for a .45 cannon set up in a broken window, cans of processed meat, a field telephone. A strange,
ugly statuette made of painted clay that Criid smashed against the wall the moment she saw it.
“Check around!” she said.
“Here!” Mkhef called.
At the back end of the chamber, corrugated metal sheets roofed in the entrance to a tunnel. They peered in. It was
dark, but well shored up with flakboard.
Chances were it ran directly back to the Shadik lines.
“What do we do?” asked Vril.
Criid ignored him. She was looking at the field telephone. The light on top of it was blinking. Feth.
“We can’t stay here. They’ll either close this tunnel when they don’t get an answer or they’ll start coming through
in force.”
Away across the no-man’s land they could hear cannons and mortars opening up from the Shadik front.
She looked back at the tunnel mouth. Such a great chance to reach into the enemy lines. But not tonight.
“Fall back!” she ordered, her micro-bead set on the platoon channel. She was last out of the mill. Pausing as she
left she tossed a tube-charge into the mouth of the communications tunnel, closing it off in a flurry of mud and earth
spoil. If they couldn’t use it neither would the Shadik.
Daylight came early over the Peinforq Line, dirty and hazy. It had begun to rain again, and an early bombardment was
thumping to the north.
Gaunt waited in his dugout station, toying with an almost empty cup of caffeine.
The gas curtain was pushed back and Daur came in.
“What’s the story?” Gaunt asked him curtly.
“Five, ten and eleven came back in. Ten just a few minutes ago.”
“Losses?”
Daur shook his head. “They didn’t make much contact, they just dropped back when things got lively.”
“Anything useful?”
“Criid did well. Her gang reconnoitred some old mill structure that isn’t on the maps. Obs post. They picked off
the troopers manning it. It had a dugout run back to the enemy line. Criid sealed it”
“How?”
“Tube-charge. She’s annoyed. I think she’d have taken a team down it to see what was what if things hadn’t woken
up.”
“She did the right thing.” Daur nodded. “Seventeen?” asked Gaunt.
“Nothing yet. No sign. Zero on the vox. Soric and Criid both confirm the commotion came from Raglon’s area.”
Gaunt put the porcelain cup down on the table carefully because he was aware he’d been about to throw it. He’d
sent four platoons out on this first night to play the Alliance’s new game, and he’d only got three back. Raglon. He’d
been Gaunt’s vox-officer for several years. He’d been so proud to get his pins and his command.
“What do we do, sir?” asked Daur.
“We do it by the book,” Gaunt replied. “Stand everyone down. Tomorrow night, four more platoons, four new
areas. Haller, Bray, Domor, Arcuda. Get them ready. Tell them—”
“What sir?”
“Tomorrow night, I’m going with them.” Daur paused. “As your XO, sir, I have to recommend you don’t.”
“Noted.”
“Just for the record, you understand, sir.”
“I do. Thank you for observing your duty, Ban.”
“I’d like to go too, sir.”
Gaunt managed a thin smile. “You know I can’t allow that. Not both of us.”
“Then let me go in your place.”
“Not this time. Ban. I won a decent operation for half the Ghosts. I’m damn well going to stand by the ones who
got the lousy half of the deal. Maybe you go the night after Deal?”
“Deal, sir.”
Daur had been gone for some minutes when the gas curtain was pulled back again. It was Zweil.
“I hear we’re missing some people,” said the old Hagian cleric setting down without being invited. “Raglon’s
platoon.”
“I want to go out tonight. If there’s a chance we find them, I’d like to be there.”
“We won’t even be covering that area again, father. There’s no point.”
Zweil frowned. “You won’t even go back to look?”
“We are obliged to try other areas, father. Not the zones where the Shadik are expecting us. Standard field policy.”
“Whose?”
“Mine.”
“Hmmmm,” said Zweil. He sat down facing Gaunt. “Tough job you’ve got here.”
“It’s always a tough job.”
“Yes, but sending your platoons out into that… wasteland… hoping you’ll find a gap in their lines. Why would that
be again?”
“You know damn well, Zweil. Don’t pretend Daur hasn’t told you.”
Zweil grinned. Gaunt had always liked that grin, from the moment he’d first met the old priest on Hagia. It was
confident, wise.
“Very well, Ibram. Pretend I’m Daur. Confide in me your plans.”
“I don’t think so. You haven’t got the clearance.”
“I could have the clearance, if you allowed it.”
“No, Zweil.”
The old man held out his hand, knuckles bunched, palm down. “Play you for it. Knuckles.”
“Oh, for goodness’ sake…”
“Unless you’re afraid an old priest’ll beat you?”
Gaunt turned round smartly and put his bent knuckles against Zweil’s. “Never taunt a Guard officer,” he said.
Zweil nodded. In a flash, he’d cracked Gaunt’s knuckles with a blow from the right.
“Ow!” cried Gaunt. “I didn’t think we’d started!”
“Now you do. Best of three?”
Gaunt paused, then rapped down, missing as Zweil’s hand pulled away.
In reply, Zweil snapped his hand round in a feint, and then smacked Gaunt’s knuckles again from the right. “Best of
five?” asked Zweil, grinning.
“No. Enough.”
“So you’ll grant me clearance?”
“No.”
Zweil sighed and sat back. “Got you twice.”
“Yes, yes—”
“Both from the same angle.”
“What?”
“The same angle.”
“Do you have a point?”
Zweil nodded. “I caught you because you didn’t think I’d try the same thing twice. What if the Shadik think the
same way?”
“Very clever. Now get out.”
Zweil got to his feet. “Promise me something. I think that’s the least you can do seeing as how I won.”
“Go on.”
“If you decide to go out into the same zones again tonight, take me with you.”
Gaunt hesitated. “Yes, father.”
“Bless you,” said Zweil.
Gaunt had called Criid to his dugout. He wanted to know more about this mill she’d found. But when the knock came,
it wasn’t Criid. It was Count Golke.
He was wearing battledress.
“Going somewhere?” Gaunt asked.
“When you head out again tonight, I’ll be with you.”
“Why would you do that, sir? You’re liaison. Front-line work is behind you.”
“I know the Pocket, Gaunt. I served here. I got you into this mess, though it wasn’t my intention. I think I can help
you.”
“Really?”
Golke nodded.
“So… what about the mill.”
“I’m guessing it’s the old Santrebar watermill. I didn’t know any of it was still standing.”
“Well,” said Gaunt. “You’ve given it a name. But I don’t think—”
“I was a soldier, Gaunt, before I was anything else. Before I got drawn into the political nonsense running this
war. I think I’ve outlived my usefulness as a staff officer. Let me be a soldier again.”
There was a knock.
Criid entered. “Reporting as ordered, sir,” she said. “Sit down, sergeant and tell me and the count about this
mill…”
NINE
THE MANSE
“Haunted? Well, there are ghosts here, that’s for certain.”
—Trooper Brostin
The storm that had begun the previous evening showed no sign of easing up. Rain drummed the roof of the manse and
pattered against the windows all night. Past midnight, peals of thunder and brilliant flashes of lightning had made it
seem like they were still back at the line, enduring shelling.
By dawn, the electrical tumult had stopped, but the rain had got harder It was as if the vast, black thunderheads
were too heavy to clear the peaks of the Massif and had hooked there, deluging the forest like dirigibles trying to
shed ballast.
From the streaming porch windows of the manse, Caffran could see out onto the gloomy garden at the front.
Already overgrown by the time they’d pitched up the night before, it was now littered with torn leaves and broken
boughs brought down in the night. Swirling rivers of rainwater gushed from the higher slopes of the rear gardens, via
a hedged ditch on the east side of the manse, to the gate. A lower part of the lawn was actually underwater.
He went back down the hall to the kitchen. It was early still. From the drawing room, he could hear loud,
bellicose snoring. No point disturbing those sleepers, he decided. Various pots and pans from the kitchen shelves
stood on the floor of the hall and up some of the stairs, pinging and beating as they caught steady drips coming in
from above. Caffran nudged one around with his foot, so it was more completely under a particularly busy trickle.
Mkvenner, Jajjo and Muril were in the kitchen. Ven was sitting at the table, studying the map and chewing on a Cbar
ration. Muril was occupying the window bench, sipping a can of caffeine. Jajjo greeted Caffran and offered him
a cup from the pot on the stove. He was munching on some leftovers from the previous night’s meal.
Muril and Larkin had caught up with them about an hour after they’d entered the manse. Soaked through, they were
carrying a knife-trimmed branch from which hung a plump buck. Nineteen detail had eaten well. Some of them had
drunk well too.
“What’s the plan?” Caffran asked, sitting down opposite Mkvenner.
“Don’t ask me,” Mkvenner replied tersely, without looking up.
Caffran held up his hands in a gesture of surrender. “Only asking,” he said.
Mkvenner sighed and sat back. “Sorry, Caff. Didn’t mean to snap.” He folded up his map, got up, and pulled his
camo cape around him. “I’ll be outside, checking the perimeter.”
He stepped out into the torrential downpour and closed the door after him. The old latch fell with a clack.
“Feth!” said Caffran. “What bit him on the arse?”
“He seems pretty normal to me,” muttered Muril. Her tone was as dreary as the daylight.
“Come on, that’s grim, even by Ven’s standards,” said Caffran.
“I think he’s pretty gakked off with Feygor’s attitude,” Jajjo said. “He wanted to get an early start, move on into
the woods, but they’re all still sleeping it off. And… no one stood watch last night.”
“I did,” said Caffran.
Jajjo nodded. “Yeah, all three of us did. But Brostin and Cuu were meant to do the small hours, and they didn’t
bother. They were too busy being unconscious.”
“Feth…” Caffran said. The idea alarmed him. He couldn’t remember the last time he’d spent a night in the field
without someone on perimeter. Anyone could have snuck up in the dark. The whole fething Shadik Republic could
have snuck up in the dark.
“I’m gonna go wake Feygor up,” Caffran announced.
“Is that really a good idea?” asked Muril.
“No, maybe not.” Caffran reconsidered, sitting back down. “The amount he was putting away last night, it’s not
going to be pretty this morning.”
“Him and Brostin and Gutes and Cuu,” said Jajjo, the level of his disapproval obvious. “Like they were off duty.”
Caffran smiled. He liked Jajjo, but the man could be a real stuff-shirt sometimes. Though only Feygor and his
drinking buddies had got wasted the night before, everyone had enjoyed the luxury of a glass or two, even Ven. But
not Jajjo. Come to think of it, Caffran had never seen Jajjo drink.
“You got to cut them some slack,” Caffran told the Verghastite. “I know we’re on a tour here, but this is easy-hive
compared to the line we were in. They’re gonna blow off steam a little, given these opportunities.”
Jajjo sniffed. “Whatever,”
They heard voices in the hall, and Larkin and Rerval entered the kitchen. Neither one of them had disgraced
themselves the night before either, though Rerval had become a little tipsy. Larkin had disappeared early.
“Could be the weather,” Larkin was saying.
“It doesn’t feel right,” replied Rerval. “I’m not getting a signal at all.”
“What’s the problem?” asked Caffran.
“Vox is down,” said Larkin, helping himself to caffeine.
“Vox isn’t down,” Rerval insisted. “There’s something up with the caster set.”
“You sure?” said Muril. “Could be the weather.”
“Don’t you start,” Rerval said, shaking his head. “I’m gonna have to strip it down. Once I’ve got some brew
inside me.”
“Heavy head?” Jajjo asked, without sympathy.
“No,” replied Rerval. The intended rebuke had annoyed him. “I slept badly. Kept waking up. This place is full of
the strangest noises.”
“Yeah, I know what you mean,” said Caffran. “How’d you sleep, Larks?”
“Like a baby,” said Larkin quietly. Caffran wondered where. The heavy drinkers had spent the night in the drawing
room by the fire. The rest of them had occupied bedrooms on the first floor: Jajjo and Mkvenner in one, Rerval,
Muril and Caffran in another.
“Well, I’m going to do something useful,” Jajjo announced. “Cleaning up, maybe.”
“You’re kidding!” said Muril.
“We left a mess in that dining room last night. This is somebody’s house.”
“Somebody who left years ago,” said Rerval. “This whole sector has been evacuated. Corbec told us so.”
“I still think it’s polite. We’re not looters. Well, I’m not anyway. Someday maybe, someone will come home here
again.”
They were all looking at him.
“Oh, all right. If we stay here another day, we’re going to need clean plates ourselves.” Caffran sighed. “I’ll
help,” he said.
The pair of them left the kitchen and walked back down the hall towards the dining room. The hall was dark, and
they easily saw the little flash that briefly lit the windows. A short delay, and thunder growled distantly.
“Feth,” said Caffran. “Is it ever going to let up?”
Jajjo paused in the doorway of the dining room. He was staring at something.
“What’s up?” asked Caffran.
“That raincoat. It was on the coatstand last night when we came in.”
“Yeah, and it’s still there.”
“Right. But now it’s wet.”
A little puddle had collected on the tiles under the wooden stand.
Caffran glanced round and saw the look on Jajjo’s face. “Don’t start. Someone used it last night, that’s all.”
“Who?”
Caffran shrugged. “I don’t know! Someone very drunk, maybe? There are several candidates.”
Jajjo smiled, reassured. They went into the dining room and stopped dead.
The table was clean and wiped. The chairs set back in place. All the crockery was gone.
“What the feth—?” Caffran began.
“I thought we were supposed to be the ghosts,” Jajjo muttered.
“I said don’t start—” Caffran snapped. His words were cut off by a sudden yelling from the drawing room. And
by a blast of las-fire.
“You fethers! You fethers!” Feygor was howling. Naked except for his undershorts, he was sitting up on his crumpled
bedroll, his rifle in his hands. Caffran and Jajjo rushed in, blades drawn. A second later, Rerval, Larkin and Muril
burst in from the kitchen.
The stuffed behj was lying on its back in front of Feygor, its head shot off. Sawdust drifted down in the air. On
their own bedrolls around the room, Brostin, Gutes and Cuu were blinking awake.
“What the feth’s going on?” asked Caffran.
“Those fethers!” Feygor squawked. “I woke up and that fething thing was standing over me! Ha ha… very fething
funny, you bastards! Who put it there?”
“You killed it for sure this time,” said Cuu and slumped back onto his mat.
“Who put it there?” demanded Feygor again.
Gutes shook his head.
“Bastards!” cried Feygor and kicked out at the stuffed beast.
“Did anyone put it there?” asked Caffran. There was a chorus of “no” and “not me”. He glanced at Jajjo before the
dark-skinned trooper could speak. “Don’t even think about it,” he warned.
“I think this place is haunted,” Jajjo said anyway.
“Feth off!”
“You dumb gak!”
“I said don’t go there,” Caffran admonished.
“Well, who washed up then, eh?” asked Jajjo. There was a pause.
“I did,” said Gutes. Rerval and Caffran groaned.
“Feth you! Old habits die hard.” Gutes got to his feet and wandered off to find the can.
“Good old wash-bin Gutes,” smiled Larkin.
“I heard that, you fether,” Gutes’ voice trailed back from the hall.
“And the stuffed animal?” snapped Caffran. “Brostin? Had to be someone with a bit of muscle to move that thing.”
Brostin turned over in his bedroll, and put his hands behind his head. The pose emphasised the huge girth of his
arms and pecs. He stared at Caffran. “You accusing me, Caff?”
“Seems like your style, yeah.”
“Yeah, well… it was. Funny as feth, eh?” He closed his eyes and rolled over again.
“Bastard!” Feygor snarled, and threw a boot at him.
Caffran turned and ushered Larkin, Rerval, Muril and Jajjo out. “Leave them to it,” he said.
Gutes was in the kitchen, drinking the last of the brewed caffeine.
“Thanks for putting the stuff away, though,” he said. “What?” asked Caffran.
“The plates and stuff. I washed it all up, but I didn’t know where it went, so I left it by the sink.” He looked at
their faces. “What? What?”
By noon, everybody was up. Brostin, Feygor and Cuu were still in their underwear, grim and hungover. The rest of
nineteen were kitted up, filling time.
Muril had found a regicide set from somewhere, and was playing a game with Larkin.
Rerval came into the kitchen. “Which of you fethers took it?” he asked.
“Took what?” Feygor asked.
“The caster’s down because someone took out the main transmission circuit. I don’t carry a spare for that. Who’s
got it?”
There was a general shrugging and shaking of heads. “Come on.”
“We’re not tech-heads, Rerval. We don’t feth around with tech-kit,” said Brostin. “Do I look like an adept of the
Mechanicus?”
“Someone did it. Clean job too. Mister Feygor?”
“Why are you looking at me, trooper?”
“Maybe you thought we’d get to stay here an extra night or two and enjoy the facilities if we unexpectedly lost
contact.”
Feygor set down his mug. “You know what, Rerval? I wish I’d thought of that. I really do. It’s neat, it’s sneaky. It
serves my purpose. But I was planning on staying here a while anyway, vox-link or no vox-link. I didn’t feth with
your beloved caster.”
He leaned forward, staring Rerval in the face. “Don’t ever fething accuse me of crap again, you little bastard.”
Rerval blinked and looked away suddenly. “Sorry,” he said.
“Sorry what?” snapped Feygor. Everyone looked on, stony-faced. Caffran didn’t like what he was seeing. Feygor
was a bully, with a mean-streak as wide as the Kottmark Massif.
“Sorry, ‘Mister Feygor’.”
“Better,” said Feygor, leaning back.
“Sure as sure,” murmured Cuu from the rear of the room.
Feygor yawned. “Anyone want to tell me about this circuit? While we’re on the topic? Like I said, it suits me fine,
the vox being down, but I’d like to know who sabotaged it. Anyone?”
No one spoke.
“Okay—” said Feygor with a wicked smile. “If our culprit would like to fit it back into the little whining bastard’s
caster-set in… oh, three days? That’d be fine and I won’t mention it to Corbec. Understood?”
The troopers shifted awkwardly. Thunder was still grumbling around the forest and the rain was lashing down.
Feygor looked over at Brostin. “Go and get some wine,” he said.
Brostin got up and shambled out.
“Are we not moving today?” asked Caffran.
“Do I look like I’m moving. Caff? Do I?”
“No, Mister Feygor.”
“Then I’m probably not moving.”
“We should—” Jajjo began.
“And not a word from you, Verghast. Okay?” Feygor rocked his chair onto its back legs. “Look,” he said, slightly
more softly. “Have you seen this weather? It isn’t letting up. The way I call it, we stay put until it breaks. We’d be
mad to try and push on in this. No offence, Larks.”
“None taken,” said Larkin.
“Anybody else got a problem with that? Anybody else got a problem with me being in charge? Because I seem to
remember that’s the way Colonel Corbec wanted it.”
The back door opened, and Mkvenner came in, water streaming off the folds of his cape. He looked around at the
silent assembly of figures.
“I take it we’re not going anywhere,” he said darkly.
“Any contacts?” Feygor asked him.
Mkvenner shook his head. “Nothing. Perimeter’s secure. The area’s quiet. Though someone or something’s
disturbed one of the outhouses. Like someone’s been sleeping out there.”
“Recently?” Feygor asked.
“Couldn’t tell,” Mkvenner said.
“We won’t worry about it, then.”
“Your call,” said Mkvenner.
“Why, yes it is,” said Feygor.
Mkvenner paused. “Mission requirements call for us to scope this valley,” he said. “And we will,” said Feygor.
“When?”
“When I’m ready,” Feygor said, looking round at Mkvenner. “You ought to relax, Ven.”
“There’re many things I ought to do, Mister Feygor. But I won’t.”
Feth, thought Caffran. This could turn really ugly.
“Tell you what, Ven,” said Feygor. “You want to scope so badly, you go ahead. You’ll move faster without us.
Head out, get the lie of the land, and swing back. By then, the weather may have cleared.”
“Is that an order?”
“Yeah, why not? Run a deep patrol, check things out, come back here. Once the storm’s gone, we’ll move out and
finish the sweep with you. Think of us as base camp. As HQ. We’ll hold things here.”
Mkvenner had an icy look in his eyes. “Should we check that with Ins Arbor base?” he asked.
“Ah, sadly, vox is down,” Feygor said, with a contented smile.
Mkvenner looked around the kitchen. “Okay. I’ll be gone a day, tops.”
“The Emperor protects,” said Feygor.
Brostin came back in, his arms full of wine bottles. “These do?” he asked.
“They most certainly will,” said Feygor.
Mkvenner took one last contemptuous look at Brostin, Feygor and the bottles, and left.
“Ven! Ven!” Caffran called out as he ran through the rain, up the back plot of the manse, after the retreating scout.
Mkvenner stopped and waited for him. Thunder clashed above them.
“This isn’t right,” said Caffran.
“Yeah, but it’s what’s happening.”
“Feygor’s out of line.”
Mkvenner nodded. “He is. But he’s got command of this detail. What are you going to do? Mutiny?”
“Corbec would understand.”
“Yes, he would. But if you or I get into a clash with Feygor, it could get nasty long before Corbec arrives to
intervene. It’s crap, but it’s better just left.”
Caffran shrugged. “We could just go with you.”
“We?”
“Me, Muril, Rerval… probably Larks. Jajjo definitely. Maybe even Gutes.” Thunder rolled again. “I’ll take Jajjo.
Send him on up.”
“That’s it?”
Mkvenner fixed Caffran with a fierce stare. “Think about it this way. I’d be happy to sit out a few days in that
place, getting plastered and telling old stories. But there’s a job to do. There’s a chance… just a chance… that
there’s enemy activity in this forest. And while that chance exists, I’m going to look for it.”
“Yeah and—”
Ven held up a finger to silence Caffran. “In an ideal galaxy, we’d all go. The way we were meant to. But thanks to
Murtan Feygor, this isn’t an ideal galaxy. So we improvise. That’s what we’re good at, after all. If I find something
out there, Emperor protect me, I’d like to have a patrol fire-team at my back. Failing that, I’d like to know there’s a
secure, well-defended strongpoint position not too far away at my heels. Stay here, Caff. Right here. Get Muril,
Rerval, Larkin —maybe even Gutes, like you said — and lock this place up ready. Just in case.”
“Okay. If that’s what you want.”
“It’s what I want. Not what I’d wish for, but it’ll do. As far as I’m concerned, you’re in charge here now. Hold the
manse and wait for me. Feygor can get his when we get back. I’ll see to it personally. For now, let’s just worry about
getting the job done and not fething up.”
Caffran nodded.
Mkvenner took his hand and gripped it tight. “I’m relying on you.”
“Signal when you can.”
“Not a lot of range on these micro-beads. No more than a league or two in these woods.”
“Do it anyway. If it’s bad news… make the signal ‘comeuppance’.”
Mkvenner smiled. Caffran hadn’t seen him do that very often.
“Okay. Send Jajjo up. I’ll see you in a day and a night.” Caffran stood and watched Mkvenner stride away through
the rain until he had vanished into the edge of the wood. Thunder boomed.
“Where’s Jajjo?” asked Muril, wandering into the kitchen. The storm had worsened and the light was bad. From the
drawing room, they could hear sounds of laughter and drunken antics. “He’s gone with Ven,” said Caffran.
Muril sat down on the window bench. “Oh, that’s just typical!” she said venomously. “Calm down,” said Rerval.
“Bite me, Tanith! This whole tour’s turning into crap,” she complained.
There was a particularly loud roar from the drawing room. A crash. Laughter.
“What are they doing?” asked Caffran.
“Using that stuffed thing as a battering ram,” said Rerval. “I think the game is to see how long one of them can stay
on its back with the others running it around the room.”
“Children,” Muril said, acidly.
“Listen,” said Caffran. “I spoke to Ven. He thinks there’s no point going up against Feygor. But he wants us to hold
this place, in case.”
“In case of what?” asked Rerval.
“In case he and Jajjo find something out there. Okay? Where’s Larkin?” Rerval shrugged. “Muril, you seen Larks
recently?”
“No,” she said, preoccupied. “Why the gak does Jajjo get to scout? Why the gak does that happen?”
“Just forget it,” said Caffran. “We have to focus. We’ll take watches. Two hours on. You handle the first one,
Muril?”
“Sure,” she said.
“Rerval. Sweep the perimeter and then start building cover for us. Anything you can find.”
Rerval nodded. “What’ll you be doing, Caff?”
“I’m going to find Larks,” he said.
Night fell. The rainstorm continued to hammer the forest and drench the manse. In one of the outbuildings, an old
greenhouse at the edge of the rear yard, facing north, Muril cowered and shivered, watching the tree-line. It was just
a dark expanse of trunks half-screened by the sheeting rain.
Rerval brought her a cup of hot caffeine and a plate of sliced salt beef.
“Been busy?” she asked him.
There’s not a lot to use, but I managed to raise a barricade across the yard at the back of the kitchen. And I
boarded up some of the ground floor windows at the back.
“Where’s Caffran?”
“Doing the rounds,” he said.
Caffran was actually emptying pots. No one had bothered to tip out the pots and pans that had been standing under the
drips, and now some of them were overflowing. He opened the front door and slung each one empty into the
downpour.
Light bled into the hallway from the drawing room, along with raucous noise and the smell of a decent fire.
Caffran could hear Brostin telling a coarse story, and Cuu and Gutes exploding into laughter. A bottle broke. There
was another, stranger sound that Caffran realised was Feygor laughing too, choking the noise in and out of his
augmetic throat.
Caffran shuddered.
He closed the front door. He hadn’t been able to find Larkin anywhere.
He looked at the coatstand. The raincoat had gone.
The drawing room door burst open and Gutes tumbled out. Light and heat and laughter spilled out around him.
“More wine!” he exclaimed.
“Haven’t you had enough?” Caffran asked.
“Don’t be so fething uptight, Caff!” Gutes replied. “Why don’t you join us. We’re having a fine time.”
“So I heard.”
“Makes a change from the fething war!” Gutes slurred.
“The war’s still going on,” smiled Caffran.
Gutes looked sad. He pulled the door shut, cutting out the sounds of merrymaking. He leaned against the hall wall
and slid down until he was sitting.
“I know. I know. It never lets up, does it? War. There’s only war. It’s the only future we’ve got. Dark? Yes! Grim?
Oh, yes, sir! There’s only ever war!”
“Don’t worry about it, Piet,” Caffran reassured.
“I don’t, Caff, I don’t,” Gutes mumbled. “I’m just so tired, you know? Just so very fething tired of it all. I’m worn
out. I’ve had enough.”
Caffran crouched down beside the intoxicated trooper.
“Get off to bed, Piet. Things’ll seem better in the morning.”
Gutes struggled up to his feet. Caffran had to help him.
“Things seem better now, Caff! They really do. I gotta get more bottles.” He lurched away towards the cellar door.
Caffran thought about trying to stop him, but decided not to. Gutes was too far gone.
He heard a creak on the stairs above him, and quickly brought round his lasrifle, switching on the lamp pack under
the barrel.
Halfway down the stairs, a little old woman flinched at the sudden, fierce beam of light. She was wearing a
raincoat, and it was dripping wet.
Caffran’s light illuminated Larkin beside her. He was smiling as he steadied the old woman’s arm. “Hey, Caff,” he
said. “Look who I found…”
TEN
SANTREBAR MILL
“Blood for land: the commerce of war.”
—Satacus, “Of the Great Sezars.”
The Republic subjected sectors 57 and 58 of the Peinforq Line to a sustained gas attack during the morning. The
wind, a brisk westerly, favoured their enterprise, and carried the gas swiftly into the Alliance fire trenches: so
swiftly, in fact, Alliance respirator drill was found wanting. Men died in dreadful numbers. Three hundred and fortyeight
in one five-kilometre stretch alone. Hundreds more were brought out of the reeking amber mist, frothing and
blistering, screaming and crying.
A fitful barrage responded to the gas attack. Less modest artillery quaked the earth for over an hour to the north, in
59th sector.
The gas took a long time to dissipate, and the Shadik had undoubtedly been planning on that. At a few minutes
before 15.00, a considerable portion of the 57th sector fire trench was assaulted by a brigade of raiders who had
advanced under cover of the chemical fog. For a period of about twenty-five minutes, savage, blind fighting occurred
at the 57th, and there seemed a genuine danger that the line would be penetrated. The timely arrival of a detachment
of the Bande Sezari, as well as a company of elite Kottsmark chemtroops, tipped the scales. Then the wind turned,
and the poison smog began to drift east off the Peinforq defences. The Shadik raiders beat their retreat.
By then, this possible opportunity had been anticipated, and Alliance Staff Command 57th/58th opted to press.
Cavalry and light foot elements were pushed through to overtake the raiders then continue on for a counter-attack.
They were supplemented by armour.
Alliance armour was in the main ponderous, primitive, rhomboidal tanks with heavy roof or sponson guns. These
sluggish giants rumbled their way out into the Pocket. They were menacing, but had not achieved much success in
anything but psychological terms since their first employment twelve years earlier. However, on this day, five
Imperial Guard Thunderers, spared from the action at Gibsgatte, led them out. By evening, they had made a
memorable dent in the Shadik lines. It was the first demonstration of modem armour superiority witnessed on Aexe
Cardinal.
At the time of the first toxin shelling, the First was laid up in a secondary line, awaiting the evening advance to the
fire trench. They had decent warning time on their side, but their respirator drill was excellent anyway. They sat
tight, until word started to come in of the raid on the 57th sector. Daur went to see Gaunt immediately.
“We can reinforce,” he suggested. “We’re close enough to do some good.”
Gaunt refused the idea. He’d worked hard to secure a legitimate role in the Alliance for both arms of the First, and
he wasn’t about to upset that stability with a show of unilateral bravado. However much he wanted to.
“Stand three platoons to,” he conceded to Daur finally. “If command requests us, we’ll move at once.”
They waited, tense, for an hour or so. When the wind turned and the counter-assault pushed through, Gaunt and
Golke moved down to an observation post on the hem of the secondary line.
Borrowing Gaunt’s magnoculars, Golke watched the steady advance of the tanks, his gaze lingering over the
heavy-set, trundling shapes of the Guard armour pieces. The Thunderers were painted mustard drab, and moved
forward with their siege-dozers lowered, ripping through piquet lines and thorny barricades of wire. Sprays of
liquid mud kicked up from their churning treads.
Golke was seriously impressed. He spoke for a while about armour clashes he’d witnessed, though he was so
preoccupied with what he was seeing there was no real thread to his talk. Gaunt understood that Golke had received
his injuries during one of these clashes, but he didn’t want to press the count for details. Golke mentioned
“dreadnoughts”, yet the word did not seem to mean the same thing for him as it did for Gaunt. To an Aexegarian,
“dreadnought” was a catch-all word for any armoured war machine.
Whistles were blowing all along the trench system to sound all-clear. The gas had washed out of the line. Gaunt
took off his respirator and wiped his sweat-damp face. The afternoon light was good and clear, grey and bright,
except for the roiling yellow fume of the departing gas that blanketed no-man’s land.
“Nightfall’s at 19.40,” Golke remarked. He produced a data-slate. “I have a schedule for tonight’s barrages. When
do you want to move out?”
It was a legitimate question. Provided he informed Allied GSC, the timing of the Ghosts’ next raid was down to
him. Gaunt looked at the Aexegarian. “Now,” he said.
The main field infirmary of 58th sector was a large system of bunkers situated amidst the reserve and firing trenches
at the back of the line, west of the main gun-pits and artillery dens. Set well underground, beneath a roof of rockcrete
and flak-sacks, it was said to have its own shield umbrella too, but Dorden didn’t believe that.
However, the facilities were decent. Curth had made strenuous efforts, since they’d moved north, to secure fresh
supplies from the Munitorium fleet, and Mkoll had taken his own platoon back to escort the supplies and make sure
they arrived unmolested. Many of the First, Dorden included, had been surprised that Mkoll had not been part of the
regiment’s eastward deployment to the Montorq.
“Scouts are needed here too,” Mkoll had told Dorden when the subject came up. “I’m not about to head for the
forest and expect the lads I leave here to do something I wouldn’t do myself.”
There was an implication in the master-scout’s remark, Dorden felt. Whatever happened out in the Montorq, good
or bad, only bad was going to happen here. The Pocket was going to see action, no matter what. Mkoll’s selfless
sense of duty wasn’t going to let him shirk.
When the First had been moved up to the 58th sector, Dorden had packed up his field hospital at Rhonforq and
brought it with him, wounded and all, so he could maintain personal care for them and be on hand for the new
fighting. That afternoon, gas-attack victims poured into the infirmary’s triage hall. None of them were Ghosts, but
Dorden and his medicae staff didn’t hesitate. They sprang up to support the Alliance surgeons, bathing eyes, treating
bums, washing poisons out of cloth and bubbling flesh. The respiratory damage was the worst. There was little they
could do for the victims with fluid-filled, drowning lungs except try to stabilise them.
Dorden worked urgently. He clearly missed Foskin and Doctor Mtane, who had both gone west with the Montorq
mission. He wanted to trust the ministrations of the Alliance surgeons, many of whom were devoted, good men, but
their medical practices seemed so terribly outmoded. He took careful note of the treatment deficiencies he saw, and
hoped there would be an opportunity for him to advise the sector’s chief of medicine on better, less barbarous
techniques. At least three troopers he saved that afternoon were dying as a direct result of treatment rather than gas.
A terrible stench of chemical bums and corrupted blood filled the infirmary. Frothy, discoloured waste matter
wept in lakes across the stone floor. Corpsmen turned on the roof vents and hosed with disinfectant but it didn’t do
much good.
“Feth!” muttered Rawne. “The smell is going to choke me to death!”
“Will it make you stop talking?” asked Banda. He looked across the aisle at her cot with a withering stare, but she
just grinned. She was pale, and a cut above her right eye was black with stitches. Her mending lungs were having a
hard time coping with the wretched air. Still, she found the breath to taunt him.
Rawne got up off his cot, and sat carefully. The ward hall was full of Ghosts, as well as a few Krassians,
casualties from that first trench fight at the 55th sector. Many, like Rawne, were healing well, but it would be a long
time before they could be pronounced fit for active duty. Rawne wondered how many more Ghosts would come
through these halls before the present occupants made their way out.
The days since he had been wounded had passed at a dishearteningly slow crawl. Rawne felt detached and very
much out of the loop, even though he’d been brought regular reports. He wanted to get up and out, but not because he
was such a dutiful soldier he needed to get back to play his part.
He was distressed at the prospect of what feth-heads like Daur might be doing in his absence.
“What are you doing?” asked Banda.
He didn’t reply. He grabbed hold of the back of a wooden chair and slowly dragged himself to his feet. The pain
in his stomach, which had been a dormant ache for the last thirty hours, started to throb again.
“What are you doing?” Banda repeated. “Doc Dorden’ll have your guts.”
“Feels like he already has,” Rawne snapped.
He took a deep breath, and let go of the chair back.
God-Emperor, it was hard. It felt like his legs had atrophied. It felt like someone had upturned a live brazier in his
belly. It felt like someone was stabbing a bayonet into his spine.
“What are you doing?” Banda repeated for the third time. Then added, “Major?”
That did it. Rawne hadn’t been addressed by rank for what seemed like an age. Especially by Jessi Banda. If he
but admitted it, that had been the best part of this enforced stay in the ward. Jammed together by the proximity of their
beds, the comatose nature of their immediate neighbours, and their shared suffering at station 293, they had provided
conversational company for one another. It wasn’t a friendship, exactly Rawne certainly wouldn’t acknowledge
anything like that, but they’d talked, and played boredom-defeating word games, and joked occasionally. After the
first few hours of them being cooped up together involuntarily, she had stopped calling him major and he’d stopped
calling her trooper. They had formed a cordial, sparring companionship as a reaction to their situation.
“I’m going for a breath of fresh air,” Rawne said, panting.
“Oh, what? And leave me here? And I thought we were mates.”
It was too much effort to shoot her another withering stare. It was almost too much effort to remain standing.
“Just…” he said. “Just…”
“What?” Banda asked.
He sighed. “Can you get up?”
“Can I gak.”
“Oh, for feth’s sake…” Slowly, very slowly, he plodded round the end of his cot and grabbed hold of a
wheelchair that had been folded up against the foot of the next bunk. It took him a moment to force the spring-shot
seat back into place, and he almost fell doing it.
“Careful!” she said.
“Like you care…”
He got the chair stable and shuffled it across to her bedside, leaning hard on the handles. “Come on,” he said.
She looked up at him. “Gakking well help, then.”
Setting the chair’s brake, he got her by the wrists, and levered her forward to the edge of the cot. He could hear
the wheeze in her lungs.
“Maybe we shouldn’t—”
“You started this, Rawne,” she said.
“On three. You’ll have to help me. One, two…”
She almost missed the seat completely. As it was, she had to wriggle around once she’d got her breath back.
Rawne leaned over, doubled up, dizzy from the pain in his gut.
“Okay?” she said.
“Oh, sure…”
He grabbed the handles of the chair, kicked off the brake after a couple of feeble tries, and trundled her up the
aisle towards the exit. Pushing really hurt his fethed-up gut.
But at least now he had something to lean on.
Banda was chuckling to herself. Despite the real and growing pain in his stomach, Rawne realised he was smiling
too. There was a genuine sense of escape. A comradely feel of fellow prisoners sticking together and making a break
for freedom.
And there was an agreeable sensation of flaunting the system that Rawne hadn’t felt since he’d been coining it as
part of Tanith Attica’s black market.
The two invalids edged up the infirmary’s exit ramp and out into the firing trench. It was their first sight of daylight
in a while. He wheeled Banda along the duckboards as far as a waystation, pausing every few metres to rest, and
then got an arm around her and manhandled her up into a vacant obs post. By then, they were both exhausted, and they
flopped down onto the sandbags, leaning their backs to the parapet face.
Yet they were both sniggering too.
The pain in Rawne’s belly flared for a while, but slowly it subsided now he was no longer exerting himself. They
both took deep breaths, enjoying the fresh air. It wasn’t fresh, exactly. There was a reek of mud, general sweat, wet
sacking, fyceline, promethium, fungus, sour food, latrines. But it was light years better than the gas-corrupted wastestink
that permeated the infirmary.
“We ought to do this more often,” she quipped, clearly in pain but relishing the escape.
“Now I know what Corbec meant,” he replied.
“What?”
Rawne looked at her “He’s had a tough run, this last while. Wounded, bedridden. He told me the thing he missed
worst, what hurt him worst, was missing stuff. The physical pain of injuries didn’t matter so much. It was losing his
place in things.”
She nodded.
“I didn’t appreciate what he meant really. I thought getting wounded was a vacation. And that you’d be too taken
up with your injury to worry about anything else. But he was right. It feels like I’ve been buried and left for dead and
the galaxy has moved on without me.”
There was a long pause. A detachment of Fichuan Infantry tramped past along the reserve trench below them.
Somewhere, muffled, a field-vox jangled.
“Why did you order me not to die?” she asked.
“What?”
“In the trench. I heard you. I couldn’t answer, but I heard you. You ordered me not to die.”
He thought about it. “Because I didn’t want the bother of finding a new platoon sniper,” he said.
The trace of a smile crossed her lips and she nodded sagely. “That’s what I thought,” she said.
Rawne got up and looked down over the sandbag wall into the reserve trench. Troops were coming and going. A
dirty, black ATV grumbled past, laden with shells for the feldkannones and hessian-bagged rockets for the shargenlaunchers.
“Something’s up,” he commented.
“What?”
“Beltayn just came running up and went into the infirmary.”
“Ah,” Banda said, knowingly. “You mean something’s awry…”
“I’m a little occupied, Adjutant Beltayn,” Dorden remarked as he made yet another attempt to rinse the eyes of a
screaming, thrashing Aexe trooper.
“I can see that, doctor,” Beltayn said.
“So it’ll have to wait.”
“With respect, doctor, the colonel-commissar said you’d say that. He said to tell you that the infiltration unit is
moving out in fifteen minutes and—”
“And?”
“And you should move your fething arse. His words.”
“Really?” said Dorden. “I thought he wasn’t mobilising until tonight?”
Beltayn said something that was drowned out by a particularly curdled shriek from the man on the gurney.
“I said… change of plan, doctor. We’ve got daylight cover. The gas, you see? And a whole bundle of distractions.
There’s a counter-push going on. Tanks and everything.”
“I just can’t leave this, Beltayn,” Dorden said. He’d promised Gaunt he’d move out with the next patrol in the
hope they’d find some of Raglon’s platoon, but he hadn’t counted on a triage hall full of chem-burned men.
“Go, Tolin. I can handle it,” said Curth, appearing from nowhere, her apron stained with bile and foam.
“You sure, Ana?”
“Yes. Just go.” She started to apply herself to the thrashing victim.
“Hold him!” she snarled at the stretcher bearers standing nearby. They jumped to help.
Dorden yanked off his smeared gloves and scrub-top and tossed them into a soil-bin. He took a fresh apron from
the laundered rack, and started to fill his medicae kit from the supply shelves.
“We haven’t got much time,” Beltayn urged.
“Then be a good man and get my jacket and camo-cape from the side office. They’re on the peg.”
Dorden buttoned up his kit and slung it over his shoulder. “Attention!” he yelled above the tumult of the ward. “Be
advised that Surgeon Curth is now in operational control here. No excuses, no exceptions. Go through her.”
Beltayn returned, and helped Dorden into his black. First-issue field jacket.
“Good luck!” called Curth.
“Keep it,” he replied. “You’ll need it more.”
Pulling his cape around his shoulders, Dorden hurried up the entrance ramp of the infirmary behind Beltayn.
“You say he’s decided to go in daylight?” he asked.
“Yes, doctor. I heard him telling Count Golke that stealth works even when it’s not quiet. He wants to make use of
the noise and gas and confusion to get back to where the teams were last night.”
“I see. We have to go back. I’ve left my respirator behind.”
Beltayn turned and winked. “I brought that too,” he said.
“You think of everything,” Dorden mocked.
“That’s my job,” said Beltayn, without a hint of irony.
They ran out into the reserve trench and hurried along north towards the first communications spur running east.
Dorden suddenly stopped and looked back. Beltayn skidded to a halt.
“What the feth are you doing up there?” Dorden yelled at a nearby obs tower.
“Feeling better already!” Rawne shouted back, giving a little wave. “Good hunting, doctor!”
“Just… just take your medicine!” Dorden yelled at Rawne in frustration, then followed Beltayn up the trench.
Rawne sat back down and produced a hip-flask from his pocket He unscrewed the cap and offered it to Banda.
“What is it?” she asked.
“Sacra. The best. The very last of Bragg’s legendary brew.”
“Don’t know if I should,” she said.
“You heard our venerable medic,” Rawne said. “Take your medicine.”
Laughing as hard as their painful wounds permitted, they drank to one another’s health.
The infiltrators went over the top and into the dead lands of the Pocket at a minute before five in the afternoon. Four
platoons — Criid’s, Domor’s, Mkoll’s and Arcuda’s — along with a command team of Gaunt, Dorden, Zweil,
Beltayn, Count Golke and four elite troopers from the Bande Sezari.
Respirator masks clamped on, they extended into the soupy veil of the drifting gas, which wrapped the landscape
with a tobacco-yellow stain. Visibility was down to twenty metres, though the overall light was good. A bland glow
of daylight bathed them through the toxin clouds, white and flat.
Scout Hwlan, from Criid’s platoon, took point, along with Mkoll himself and “Lucky” Bonin from Domor’s mob.
Hwlan had found the mill the night before, and they were trusting his instincts to lead them in.
To Hwlan, an experienced scout with many years as a tracker in the nalwoods of Tanith in his past it was a strange
experience. Many said the Tanith could never get lost, and claimed they had the most unerring sense of direction. The
constantly shifting trees of Tanith had bred that into them.
That was the theory, anyway.
The chemical attack had changed the ground, baking the mud so dry it had begun to crack. Underneath it was wet
and soft, and the feet of the troopers cracked the surface as they advanced, spilling up mud as fluid and yellow as
custard.
Vague landmarks from the previous night — a broken tree, a fence of wire, a dead tank — had solidified and
become permanent but they’d also been changed by the action of gas. The Pocket had become a dead space of
embalmed features, desiccated, fused, chemically transmuted.
The point men reached a wire barricade that collapsed into rust as they touched it. The liquid chemicals accreted
in some crater holes were burning.
And there were so many corpses. Dorden was shocked. Fresh corpses, hooked in wire or lying on the ground, so
florid they looked like they were still alive. Others, older, hunched and flattened into the postures of submission only
dead men can afford. Others, older still, cadaverous and dry, opening their bones to the sky.
It was also grimly silent. There was no wind, and the gas clouds stifled all noise. A bright, dry desert of war,
lethal to the touch and the merest breath.
Gaunt placed Milo and Nehn from Domor’s platoon with Zweil. The old ayatani was a newcomer to gas gear and
was clearly uncomfortable with the mask and the thick gloves. He’d cinched up the skirts of his long coat so that they
wouldn’t drag in the mire, revealing an incongruous, borrowed pair of heavy Aexegarian army boots. Gaunt could
hear a mumbling over the vox. Zweil was quietly reciting a prayer of protection. Gaunt signalled Milo to show the
priest how to turn off his micro-bead.
“I appreciate your blessings, father,” he said, but perhaps for now you could keep them to yourself inside your
hood. “We need the link quiet.”
The riven landscape curled up over a long ridge where the mud was covered in a mosaic of bones, human and
hippine. They saw the occasional rusting scrap of a respirator valve, a saddle buckle, the bent barrel of a carbine.
On the far side of the ridge, the ground shelved away into a wide basin where a brackish crescent of water shone in
the flat light. Old piquets marched in a line down the slope and disappeared into the pool. Along the eastern shore of
the water, the mud was crinkled into strange patches that reminded Gaunt of rose blooms. Shards of ashy glass clung
to the folds of each patch. He realised they were the impact marks of gas bottles from a previous attack. The mud had
baked and puckered with the intensity of the leaking toxins.
An Alliance trooper stood on the far side of the pool, headless. His rotting body was held up by the metal stake
he’d fallen against.
The trio of scouts led them round the side of the basin, and out over its lowest lip. They entered a flat area
covered in shell craters some large enough to swallow a man, others just pock-marks the size of a fist. The craters
overlapped each other, small inside large, large intersecting with larger. The pattern was so dense and seemed so
deliberate, it was surreal. To their north, on a bank of mud, lay the burnt-black carcass of a Shadik tank.
Mkoll indicated they should turn south a little, but Golke consulted his chart and advised against it A row of
crossed timbers suggested to him the edge of a mined area. Old munitions, but it was stupid to risk it, and they
weren’t set for sweeping work. In order to move light, landmine experts like Domor had left their sweeper sets at the
line.
They moved north-east instead, following a mangled ridge, plodding through murky strands of water and oil. To
their left was a series of waterlogged pits absolutely choked with bodies, as if the dead had all decided to
congregate in one place. Zweil realised he was glad of his mask.
Since they’d set out, they’d been able to hear the roaring of the counter-assault pushing ahead of them, a little to
the south. Now they heard a deeper, more booming noise. Boxed in by the gas-clouded air, they could see nothing,
but Gaunt was sure it was the Shadik super-siege weapons opening up at the Peinforq Line in response to the push.
“Any way we can fix a source at all?” Gaunt asked Mkoll without much hope. Mkoll gestured at the hood he was
wearing.
“Not really,” he replied. He thought about it and listened to the thumps. “Best guess is that way,” he pointed. “But
it’s vague.”
Gaunt turned to Hwlan. “How far to this mill?”
“Another half kilometre. We’re approaching from a slightly different angle to last night. There’s a creek, with a
fence nearby, and then the mill itself in a wide hollow.”
“It’s more like three-quarters of a kilometre,” said Golke over the link, wiping specks of mud off his chart’s
plastic cover. “And slightly more to the south.”
Gaunt looked back at Hwlan. Through the lens-plates of his bulky hood, he could see Hwlan shake his head
slightly.
“With respect, sir,” Gaunt told Golke, “I have to trust my scout.”
Golke didn’t seem abashed. He was quickly coming to admire the First’s field skills.
They moved on. In less than fifteen minutes, they were drawing in on the south-eastern side of the mined mill, just
a vague shape in the fog of gas.
Hwlan had been spot on.
It looked quiet, empty. Perhaps the Shadik had been unable to resecure it since the previous night. No sense taking
chances, though.
The Ghosts advanced, low. Gaunt spread Criid’s platoon in a semi-circle to his right, and Mkoll’s and Domo’s
wider to the left, with Arcuda’s in place to the rear, ready to support.
The troop got to within fifty metres of the shattered mill.
“Hold,” Gaunt signalled. Down, hidden under their capes, the Ghosts lined up their weapons, studying the ruin for
movement. Gaunt gestured to Mkoll.
The master scout began to slide forward under his cape. To Golke, he seemed to all but vanish. Bonin and Hwlan
quickly followed Mkoll, along with Oflyn, the scout from Arcuda’s platoon.
After ten seconds, Mkoll voxed. “Clear. We’re at the outside wall. Two big rockcrete beams fallen in a V-shape.
See them?”
Gaunt acknowledged. Golke tried to see the beams. Even when he found them, he couldn’t see the Tanith.
“Move up the assault squad,” Mkoll linked.
The squad came up, and Gaunt advanced with them. Six men: Domor, Luhan, Vril and Harjeon, with Dremmond
and Lubba and their flamers. Gaunt left fire command with Criid.
They reached Mkoll’s position. The scouts were ready to go in. Dremmond and Lubba prepped their flames. “On
three—” said Gaunt.
“Wait!” Bonin voxed. “Movement. Up, to the left. The rafters over the far window.”
Before Gaunt had time to take a look, a shot zipped out of the mill and went over their heads, followed by another
that smacked off a tie-beam Luhan was using for cover.
“Wait!” Gaunt yelled, just before his men started to return fire and hose the south face of the mill.
The shots had been las-rounds.
Gaunt adjusted the setting of his micro-bead. “One, who’s up there?” A pause. Faint static on the link. “One,”
Gaunt repeated. “Identify.”
“Two-oh-three, one,” came the response. It was Raglon.
ELEVEN
THE DUTIFUL
“Cuu’s a fething maniac, Larks…”
—Trooper Bragg (deceased), on Phantine
She wouldn’t talk. She wouldn’t even take off her raincoat She allowed Larkin and Caffran to lead her into the
gloomy kitchen and sit her at one of the chairs by the table.
She flinched as Rerval suddenly came in from outside. He looked at the old woman in confusion.
“She was hiding upstairs,” Larkin told him. “I was., patrolling and I heard a noise and I found her. She’s our
ghost.”
Caffran poured a hot drink from the stove and set it on the table beside her.
“Drink up,” he said. “You look hungry. And cold.”
She looked up at Caffran slowly, her old eyes not blinking. There was something far away in her gaze that
suggested she didn’t really see him.
“Drink up, ma’am,” said Caffran again, encouragingly. She didn’t. Her gaze returned to the glow of the stove plate.
“What do you mean she’s our ghost?” Rerval asked Larkin.
“Moving things, you know. Putting the plates away. She’s been here all the time, hiding from us.”
“How do you know?” Larkin shrugged.
“Hey, do you think she took the circuit out of my vox?” Rerval said suddenly. “Did you mess with my vox-caster,
mother?” he asked.
The sudden voice made her flinch again.
Larkin took Rerval by the arm and tugged him back. “Have a heart, lad. She’s scared witless. I promised her we
wouldn’t hurt her.”
“Of course we won’t hurt her,” said Caffran. “We won’t, ma’am.”
“Besides,” Larkin added, “I don’t see an old girl like this having the knack to disable a piece of Guard kit. Smash
it, maybe. Lift the primary transmission circuit? I don’t think so.”
“Who the feth is she?” Rerval whispered. “Apart from being our ghost, I mean. Do you think she just came here to
shelter?”
“Doesn’t feel like that to me,” said Larkin. “The way she cares about the place. Tidies stuff away, hangs up her
coat. I think this house is hers. Her home.”
“But this whole area was evacuated years ago,” said Rerval. “That’s what the colonel told us. Why would she
still be here?”
“Sometimes people don’t want to leave,” said Larkin. “Old, set in her ways, tied by memories to this place.
Maybe she chose not to.”
“Then she could have been here for ages. Years.”
“Waiting for the invaders to come. Hoping they wouldn’t,” Larkin murmured.
Caffran looked at the frail old woman. She was still immobile, placid. Her hair was silver, almost white, pinned
back rightly with small metal clips. Her clothes were clean, but old and faded, and her little leather buckle-on shoes
were worn. He could see the sole was coming away from one of them. The only reaction she made, every once in a
while, was to wince and look round at any loud noise emanating from the drawing room. The crash of a glass
breaking. A thump. Brostin’s booming laugh.
We’re invaders, he thought, invaders in her home.
“Why’s her coat wet?” he asked suddenly. “What?”
“If she’s been hiding from us here, why’s she been going outside? In the rain? And if she’s been hiding, why hang
her coat up where we can see it?”
Larkin frowned. “I don’t know. Maybe we should check around outside again when it gets light. The outhouse Ven
mentioned. He said he thought someone had been sleeping out there.”
“Someone else?” asked Caffran.
“Maybe.”
“Should we tell Feygor about her?” Rerval asked.
“Feth, no! Not tonight. Not the state he’s in. Do you want to scare her even more?”
Rerval considered Caffran’s words. “No,” he said. “There must be some clue as to who she is. I’ll nose around.”
“Okay,” said Caffran. “Stay with her, Larks. I’ll go tell Muril about her and advise her to keep her eyes peeled for
any other houseguests.”
Rerval and Caffran had both been gone for ten minutes, and Larkin had simply sat there in the kitchen with the old
woman, listening to the rain and the spit of the stove. The wind was getting up again, and the thunder was rumbling
closer.
Cuu was suddenly just standing there in the kitchen doorway. The old woman started, and Larkin looked up
sharply.
“Hey, Tanith. Who’s your girlfriend?” Cuu said. His eyes were hooded and he swayed slightly.
“Go back to your drinking, Cuu,” said Larkin softly.
“We got hungry. I came for some food. Where’d you get this old witch from?”
“She was hiding,” said Larkin.
“Hiding? In the house? Gak. What’s she got to say for herself?”
“Nothing. Just go away.”
Cuu drunkenly flapped a hand at Larkin, his attention on the old woman. He leaned down, putting his leering face
close to hers. She pulled away, avoiding eye contact.
“Stop it,” said Larkin.
“Who are you, witch? Eh? Speak up, I can’t gakking hear you? Where the gak were you hiding? Eh?” She drew
back as far as the chair would allow. “Back off, Cuu,” Larkin warned.
“Shut up, Tanith. Come on, you old witch! Who are you?” Cuu reached out and grabbed her roughly by one thin
shoulder. She let out a little gasp of fear. “Who the hell are you?”
Larkin leaned forward and grasped Cuu tightly by the wrist. He yanked Cuu’s arm back, tearing his grip from the
old woman’s shoulder, and slowly rose to his feet, pushing the drunken Verghastite backwards.
“Get the hell off,” snapped Cuu, his attention switching entirely to Larkin. He fell back unsteadily, drink slowing
his reactions, but quickly locked and pushed back. Larkin wasn’t giving.
“Get your hand off me, Tanith,” Cuu growled. “If you leave her alone.”
“Oooh, that’s it. You’ve done it now, sure as sure.”
Intoxication made him telegraph the punch. Larkin dodged it easily, and pushed Cuu right back across the kitchen.
He fell heavily against the dresser and several plates and pots fell off with a crash.
“You piece of shit,” Cuu said, reaching instinctively for his blade. But his kit was lying back in the drawing room.
In the instant it took him to realise the dagger he was groping for wasn’t there, Larkin had thrown a left hook that
twisted Cuu’s head round and dropped him to the floor. Cuu lay there, moaned, and spat bloody saliva onto the redglazed
tiles.
Larkin paused. He could do it now. He’d even have a cover story. He could fething well-But the old woman was
staring at him. Her hands were up over her head, protectively, though she was still sitting in the chair. He could see
the glint of her eyes staring out between her gnarled fingers.
“Feth, it’s okay!” said Larkin. “He won’t hurt you. I swear he won’t!” He crossed to her and bent down, trying to
calm her.
“Please, it’s okay. It’s really okay. I—”
He blacked out. There was a dull thump, like a muffled peal of thunder, and he blacked out.
He came to, sprawled face down across the table. The back of his head hurt really badly. His vision swam.
He tried to rise, but lost his balance and fell off the side of the table onto the floor.
The fall saved him. Cuu brought the iron skillet pan down for a second blow and hit the table where Larkin had
just been crumpled. The pan exploded the cup and sprayed porcelain shards and tepid caffeine across the polished
wood.
Larkin tried to crawl backwards away from Cuu, but the Verghastite came for him, swinging the pan again. It
caught Larkin on the shoulder. He kicked out at Cuu’s legs.
Cuu reached down and grabbed Larkin by the throat. With a snarl that flecked spittle out between his clenched
teeth, Cuu hauled Larkin up and threw him against the side counter. He pinned Larkin with the flat of his forearm, and
hit him with the pan again. Larkin squealed as he felt a rib go. Another savage blow and pain flared through his left
elbow. But for that raised arm, the heavy pan would have mashed his face.
“You Tanith gak! You little shit! You stupid bastard!” Cuu rained down slurs and blows alike in a berserk fury.
Suddenly, Cuu shrieked and collapsed off Larkin, dropping the pan with a clang. The metal frame stock of a Mark
III las-rifle had just smashed up between his legs from behind.
Cuu hit the floor, convulsing and choking, tears washing down his screwed up face. He fell in a foetal position,
clutched at his groin and threw up.
Dripping with storm water, Muril turned her lasrifle round so that the muzzle was pointing at Cuu’s temple.
“Any more from you, Cuu, any more, and I use this end on you instead.”
“What the feth’s going on?” demanded Caffran pulling down his cape hood as he came in through the kitchen door
behind Muril. The old woman made a sudden dash for the open door, but Caffran intercepted her gently and sat her
back down. She didn’t protest.
Muril helped Larkin up. He was shaking. One cheek was swelling and turning blue, and blood streamed from his
nose The back of his head had left more blood on the countertop.
Muril dragged out a chair and helped Larkin sit down.
“Cuu… Cuu was gonna hurt her—” he stammered.
Muril looked round at Caffran. “Little bastard nearly beat Larkin to death. If we hadn’t come back…”
Caffran looked down at Cuu, who was still curled up and weeping out jagged groans. Every few breaths, he
retched again and added to the expanding pool of liquid vomit around his head.
“Feth,” Caffran murmured. He was reaching down to grab hold of Cuu when Feygor and Brostin stormed in. They
were both very drunk, more obviously drunk than Cuu had been. Feygor was having trouble walking. They reeled to
a halt and blinked repeatedly, trying to take in the scene before them and understand it.
“Where’s the fething food, Lijah?” Feygor said.
“You want some food?” asked Caffran. “I’ll bring you some. Go back to the drawing room and I’ll bring you
some.”
His head swaying back and forth like his neck was rubber, Feygor frowned and made several vague pointing
gestures around the room.
“What the feth?” he barked, his augmetic voice box coarse and indistinct as it tried to cope with his inebriated
sounds. He looked at the old woman and tried to focus his eyes. “Who the feth is this?”
“It’s likely we’re all guests of hers here, so show some respect,” Caffran said. “She’s old and she’s scared.”
Feygor snorted. “What’s with Larks? And why’s Cuu down?”
“Cuu was making trouble for the old lady,” Muril said. “Larks tried to stop him and he went wild with a skillet.”
“We had to subdue him,” Caffran added, hoping to take a little heat off Muril if necessary.
“Cuu was hurting the old lady?” slurred Brostin. The idea seemed to offend him.
“He’s drunk,” said Muril.
“No excuse,” said Brostin with great certainty.
“Who the feth is she?” Feygor wanted to know. He took a step forward, approaching her. Caffran stepped in and
carefully steadied Feygor.
“She’s the owner of the house,” he said. He didn’t know that for sure, but it had a certain weight Feygor’s addled
brain might take in.
“Where’d she come from?”
“She was here all the time. Hiding.”
“Fething spy!” Feygor said, clapping his hands. The old woman jumped. “No, sir.”
“I fething say so. Sneaking and hiding.”
“She was scared of us. Does she look like a Shadik agent?”
“Fethed if I know!” Feygor said. He stood straight and waggled a finger. “Lock her up somewhere. Lock her up.
I’ll question her in the morning.”
“We can’t lock her up,” Muril began.
“Lock her the feth up!” Feygor spluttered. “Who’s in charge here, bitch?” Good question, Caffran thought.
Brostin tugged at Feygor’s arm. “You can’t lock her up, Murt. Wouldn’t be right. Not an old lady.”
“Kay, what then?”
“I’ll look after her. I’ll stay with her,” said Caffran. “You can talk to her tomorrow.”
“All right,” Feygor said, satisfied. He wheeled around, unsteadily, and wandered into the pantry. They could hear
the smash of breaking jars as he foraged for food.
Brostin stood for a moment, and then followed Feygor out.
“Feth,” murmured Caffran. He looked over at Muril, who shook her head. Caffran bent down and hauled Cuu
towards the door. He threw the coughing Verghastite out into the rain.
“Sober up, you little swine!” he snarled after him. Cuu lay in the yard, whining like a canine in the beating rain.
When Caffran came back into the kitchen, he saw that the old lady was carefully picking up the objects that had
fallen during the fight. Pans went back onto the dresser. Shards of china were picked up one by one.
“She just started doing that,” Muril said, dabbing disinfectant pads from her field kit to the back of Larkin’s head.
Caffran watched. The old lady threw the broken cups into the kitchen waste, and then swept up the bits she
couldn’t pick up with a dustpan and brush. She took the skillet Cuu had used to beat Larkin and hung it back on its
hook over the stove. Then she shuffled into the wash house and re-emerged with a mop.
Caffran stepped forward and took it from her. She gave it up without resistance. “Let me do that,” he said, and
started to clean Cuu’s spew off the tiles.
He wouldn’t watch her do that.
It was well past midnight. The electrical storm had returned with a show of force even greater than the previous
night. Rerval gave up his search of the upstairs. There was no sign of anything personal apart from the old furniture
and bedclothes. Wardrobes were mostly empty except for a few dry pomanders rolling about their floors. Just about
every upstairs room was damp, some saturated, from the leaking roof. Trickles of water streamed down. The air
stank of mildew and rotting linen.
He played his flashlight around the halls and the walls of the rooms. There were few pictures, but in places his
light revealed the pale oblongs where pictures had once hung. There was an ormolu clock on the mantle of one
bedroom. It had stopped at half past four. The gilt decoration showed two soldiers in plumed hats, standing either
side of the face and supporting it with their hands.
He found a linen closet where the old, piled sheets were generally dry. There were a few items of kit and some
hotshot clips stacked in the corners. This was evidently where Larkin had chosen to make his lair.
Rerval left it alone.
He saw the attic hatch, and got a chair. Pushing up through the hatch, he shone his light around. The attic was
swimming. Many tiles had gone. His beam picked out black, mouldering rafters, streams of rainwater and stacks of
rotting junk. He decided not to waste his time.
He wandered back to the stairs. How had she lived here for so long? Alone? Had the isolation snapped her mind?
Was that why she wouldn’t speak?
He went down the stairs, avoiding the plinking pots and water catchers. Lightning flashed.
Lamp light was shining from the half-open drawing room door, and he could hear voices and the clink of glasses.
A paler light was coming from under the dining room door.
Rerval switched off his flashlight and drew his laspistol. He put his hand on the door knob and carefully opened
the door.
A single candle was guttering in the middle of the long dining table, its twisting flame reflecting off the dark,
varnished top.
Piet Gutes sat on his own halfway down, his head in his hands. There was a half-finished bottle of red wine next
to him, and some pieces of paper spread out on the tabletop.
“Gutes?”
Gutes looked up. He was drunk, but that didn’t completely explain the redness of his eyes. “You all right, Piet?”
Gutes shrugged. “Doesn’t matter where you go,” he said, “it always finds you.”
“What does?”
“The war. You think you’re so far away it can’t touch you, but it finds you anyway.”
Rerval sat down beside him. “War’s our life, you know that. First-and-Only.”
Gutes smiled bitterly. “I’m tired,” he said.
“Get some sleep. We—”
“No, not like that. Tired. Tired of it all. When we got sent out here—”
“Aexe Cardinal?”
“No, Rerval. The woods. This mission. When we got sent out here, I was thankful. We might get a few days, leave
the war behind. Get out from its embrace. And when Ven and Jajjo found this place… feth, it seemed like a little
paradise. A little paradise, just for a day or two. I’m not greedy.”
“Sure.”
Gutes drummed his fingers on the table top and then took a swig of the wine. He offered the bottle to Rerval, and
Rerval knocked back a sip himself.
“Everything’s okay from far away,” Gutes said. “I mean, when you get back far enough, nothing matters.”
“I suppose,” said Rerval, handing the bottle back to Gutes.
“I was far away when Finra died. And little Foona too.”
“Finra? Your wife?”
“No,” Gutes chuckled. “My daughter. My wife died eighteen… no, nineteen years back. I raised Finra on my own,
you know? Did a good job, I think. She was a beautiful girl. And Foona. A little darling, my first grandchild.”
Rerval hesitated. He didn’t know what to say. It was ironic, he thought. I’m signals, a vox-officer. Communication
is my speciality. But I have no idea what to say to this man.
“I wish I had pictures of them,” Gutes said. “There was no time, when I signed up. It was last minute. We agreed
she’d send some on via the Munitorium. She promised me a care package. Letters.”
“They didn’t suffer, Piet,” Rerval said.
“No, I know that. Just a little flash and Tanith was dead. Bang, goodnight. Like I said, nothing matters if you’re far
enough away. You know that song? ‘Far away, up in the mountains’? Brin Milo plays it sometimes.”
“I know it.”
The candle flame fluttered and almost went out. Then it flared again, as wax dribbled from the lip. Thunder
slammed above the percussion of rain outside.
“I always thought,” Gutes said, “that she’d be the one getting the letter. My daughter, I mean. The one that comes in
the vellum envelope. The one that says blah blah blah regret to inform you that your father, etc.”
“That letter,” Rerval nodded, taking another sip from the bottle.
“Turns out, it was the other way round. Except I didn’t get any letter. Just saw a little flash from far away.”
“You should get some sleep,” Rerval said. “I know. I know, Rerval.”
“Come on then.”
“Far away. That’s what this place is. So I thought. A chance to be far away at last, just for a few days. But it
doesn’t matter where you go. It always finds you.”
He fumbled with the old papers in front of him and pushed them over towards Rerval. A letter sheet, brown with
age, and its envelope. The letter was embossed with the crest of the Aexe Alliance.
Rerval read it. “Feth, where did you find this?”
“In the rack, in the hall. It was there when we came in. I didn’t pay it much heed before.”
The letterhead date told Rerval it had been sent nearly seventeen years before. It began: “Dear Madam Pridny, on
behalf of the General Staff Command of the Aexe Alliance, I regret to inform you that your son, Masim Pridny,
corporal, was reported missing during action at Loncort earlier this week…”
“Rain’s stopped,” Muril said. A pre-dawn glow was spreading in through the kitchen windows.
The old woman was asleep, curled up on the bench seat. Larkin was sitting hunched at the table, nursing a glass of
sacra. The bruises on his face were almost black, and Muril was worried about the wound on the back of his head.
Everyone else was long since asleep, except Caffran and Rerval, who were standing guard.
Muril got up and used a cloth to open the stove plate. She tossed some more logs in, and raked them around with
the poker.
“You okay?” she asked.
“Yeah,” said Larkin. He was still studying the letter Rerval had shown them. “Poor old girl, waiting all this
time… seventeen years… waiting for her son…”
“You suppose that’s why she didn’t leave this place?”
“Yeah, I suppose. Waiting at home for a son who’s never actually coming back.”
“Poor woman,” Muril said, looking over at the sleeping figure. She sat down opposite Larkin. “Tell me about
Cuu.”
“Cuu?”
“Lijah gakking Cuu. He nearly killed you, Larks. That wasn’t about some old lady, was it?”
“He was drunk. He was hurting her.”
“Still… there’s more to it than that, isn’t there.”
Larkin shrugged. The gesture was painful. Muril wished they had Dorden around, or Curth, or even a corpsman, to
check Larkin’s ribs and elbow.
And his head.
“Don’t know what you mean,” he said.
“What I mean,” she said, “is that you and Cuu have a thing. Everyone knows it. Don’t know when and why it
started, but you have a thing.”
“A thing?”
“A feud.”
“Maybe.”
“For gak’s sake. Larks! I could help you!”
“Help me? No, Muril, you don’t want to help me. No one would want to get dragged into what I’m doing.”
“What are you doing? I mean, why the gak did you volunteer for this detail when you knew Cuu was part of it?”
Larkin smiled. He sipped his drink. Muril could see the blood blossoming in the clear liquor as he lowered the
glass from his mouth.
“I mean… the two of you have a famous feud that everyone knows about. He treats you like crap. And here you
are, signing up to join a squad that you know he’s in too. You usually do your best to stay away from him, but now
it’s like you wanted to be close, you wanted to… oh gak!”
“Now you’re getting it,” Larkin smiled.
Muril blanched. “What the gak are you planning?”
“Nothing you need to know about. Forget it.”
“I will not, Hlaine! What is this about?”
“Payback,” he said.
“Payback? For what?”
“Doesn’t matter. I should go relieve Caff.” He knocked back the drink and stood up. “With your head? Are you
sure?”
He sat back down, blinking, and felt the back of his skull with cautious fingers. “Maybe not.”
“So tell me about payback.”
“You wouldn’t understand.”
“Try me.”
Larkin smiled. “You’re a good girl, Muril.”
“So they say. Don’t change the subject. Payback.”
“What can I tell you? What if I said I want to get even for the way Cuu has persecuted me since the day we first
met? Would that be okay? He’s made my life a misery, leant on me, beaten me down. Would that be enough?”
She shrugged. “Probably. Cuu’s a bastard. A predator. He bullies anyone he can. Caff hates him, you know? After
that thing on Phantine. I know Gaunt got Cuu off, but Caff believes Cuu killed that woman. And Caff nearly went to
the wall for it.”
“I got Caff off,” Larkin said. “Me and Try. We got Caff’s case dismissed and got Cuu sent up in his place. Bragg
ratted on him. Then Gaunt got Cuu off on a technicality. Got him the lash rather than a firing squad. That’s why he
hates me. He blames me for the lashes. Me and Try.”
“So his hate is focused on you now Bragg is gone?”
“Kind of,” Larkin said, with a smile Muril didn’t like the look of.
“So that’s why you want—”
Larkin raised a finger. “I never said that. What if I want payback on Cuu because I’m crazy? Everyone knows I’m
crazy. Mad Larkin, you know the form.”
“Yeah, but—”
“I’m not right in the head. Everyone knows that. Maybe I want Cuu because I’m insane.”
“You’re not insane.”
“Thanks, but the jury is still out. I don’t care. Maybe I am crazy. Look out, Lijah Cuu.”
“What’s the real reason?” she asked.
Larkin hesitated. He wanted to tell her, but he knew how the others treated him. Mad Larkin. Untrustworthy. Crazy.
His head hurt.
“He killed Bragg,” he said simply.
“He what?”
“I can’t prove it. Not even slightly. But from what he’s said to me, he killed Bragg. For ratting on him. And now he
wants me too. So I thought I’d cut to the chase and get in first.”
She stared at him. “Really?”
“I believe it. I don’t expect you to. In fact, I’ve probably just proved to you that I’m crazy after all.”
“No,” she said. She leaned forward towards him.
“Larks… tell Gaunt about it. Gaunt or Corbec or Daur. They’ll help you. Don’t do something you’ll regret.”
“Like killing Cuu before he kills me? Too late. And it doesn’t matter what Gaunt and Corbec and Daur believe.
With what little I’ve got, their hands would be tied. Don’t you think I’ve thought of that? It goes as it goes.”
He got up unsteadily and hefted his long-las. “Thanks for smacking Cuu off me,” he said, “but do me a favour.
Forget this whole conversation. It’ll be better that way.”
Stark dawn light spread across the back lawns of the manse. Mist wisped up from the wet grass.
He caught the movement out of the corner of his eye. Not much, just a flicker of something. The vaguest flicker.
Caffran left his sentry post in the greenhouse and ran up the main back lawn. Daybreak birdsong rang around him.
He reached one of the most distant sheds, and yanked open the door.
“Out! Now!” he barked, his lasrifle aimed inside.
The Aexegarian trooper was young and matted with filth. He had a dirty twist of beard. He came out into the open,
blinking, his hands over his head.
“Don’t hurt her,” he said. “It wasn’t her fault.”
“Shut up and get your hands on the wall!” Caffran snapped.
The trooper turned and spread against the side of the shed.
Caffran reached forward to pat him down. He kept his las-rifle at the man’s back.
His vox crackled suddenly.
He backed off and adjusted his micro-bead’s setting.
“Say again? Say again?” he called.
The vox buzzed again, and he heard a single word.
“Comeuppance.”
TWELVE
ANYWHERE BUT HERE
“So I’m a plucky soldier boy, My country I hold dear, Find me somewhere to fight for, sir, Anywhere but here.”
—refrain of popular Aexegarian song
Nine men dead. Six injured. Three more sick with gas-related injuries caused by tears in their kit. Seventeen platoon
was a mess. And Raglon knew it. Gaunt could tell the novice sergeant was badly shaken and terribly ashamed of
himself. His first field office, and he’d ended up with less then fifty per cent of his platoon alive or able-bodied.
Gaunt’s infiltration force moved up to occupy the ghastly ruins of the Santrebar Mill, and as the four platoons took
station at windows and likely firepoints, Dorden co-opted half a dozen of them to help him deal with Raglon’s
wounded.
Two were close to death. Sicre and Mkwyl; there was no hope for them. Dorden called for Zweil.
It was getting on for 19.00 hours, and the day was beginning to fade. The dull bluster of the counter-push still
rolled across the wasteland towards them from the south, and the deep booming of the super-siege guns continued.
Everything was still closed in and swaddled by the yellow gas vapour.
Just after the hour, it began to rain. The light changed, a soft blush across the low yellow sky. It reminded Golke of
the way a brush wash could alter a watercolour. Painting had been his hobby, years before. He stood, looking out
from one of the mill’s low windows, almost admiring the view. It was stark and unlovely, but there was a quality to
it. The dark, rusty ground, the off-white sky slowly saturating with blue-grey.
Weighed down with his battlefield mail, heavy coat and respirator, he felt distanced. This was the land he was
fighting for, the land he had spent his adult life fighting for. As far as his eyes could see, there was nothing but the
scarring of warfare. This wasn’t the site of a battle, this was landscape transformed by the brute sorcery of relentless
fighting. Stripped, burned, poisoned, malformed, killed.
He wondered why, then, he admired its eerie beauty. Surely it wasn’t just the amateur painter in him making a trite
aesthetic response. This was the Pocket, he told himself. The Seiberq Pocket. That murderous slab of country that
had robbed him of his friends, his men and his health.
He’d emerged from this place a wreck, so dismayed by its horrors that he’d been receiving counselling from his
physician ever since. The memories still lacerated his mind.
He tried to picture it living again. Ten, fifty years in the future, a hundred… whatever it might take. He tried to
imagine the war over, and peace slowly restoring the rule of nature. Trees. Fields. Life of any kind.
Golke could imagine it, but the vision was not convincing. This, the ravaged vista before him, was the only truth.
He knew why it was important to him. The Pocket had haunted him for years, lurking in his nightmares and
daydreams. And now he’d come back to face it. That’s really why he had volunteered to assist Gaunt’s mission. This
was aversion therapy. He’d come back to face his daemons and deny them, exorcise them, banish them. He’d come
back to recover something lost by his younger self. The Pocket was a hellhole, an unfeasibly ugly ruin. But already
he could see some beauty in it.
He’d taken the first step. He’d looked upon the landscape of his nightmares and hadn’t frozen in terror.
He could do this. He could break the Pocket just like it had once broken him.
Two months earlier, his aides had dragged him out for a night at the musical hall in Ongche. A popular touring
show was in town, and they’d insisted he’d enjoy it. The gaudily-painted theatre had been packed with rowdy
soldiers on furlough, but Golke had enjoyed the performance from one of the balcony-boxes. It had all been amusing
enough, though the common troopers loved it as if it was the best thing ever. A conjuror, an acrobat troupe, a virtuoso
viol player, a clown act with trained canines, singers, bandsmen, a rather feeble soprano. A famous comedian in a
too-small hat who strutted the stage and made off-colour remarks about Shadik sexuality and hygiene to furious
approval.
Then had come the girl, the little girl from Fichua, the top of the bill. This, his senior aide told him excitedly, was
what the boys were all waiting for.
She didn’t seem much, just a child in a hoop skirt and bodice. But her voice…
She sang three songs. They were funny and saucy and patriotic. The last was a ditty Golke had heard the men
singing from time to time. An ironic piece about doing your bit in which the soldier assured his superiors he was
willing to fight, but expressed the wish to do so somewhere safe. The chorus went something like “I want to find a
place to fight, anywhere but here.”
The crowd had gone mad. The little Fichuan girl had repeated the song as an encore. Flowers had been tossed
onto the stage.
It had stayed with him. Golke had found himself humming it. “Anywhere but here, your lordships, anywhere but
here.” Three curtain calls and goodnight.
It was in his head now. The refrain went round and round.
Anywhere but here.
He understood why the men, sentimental fools the lot of them, like all soldiers off-duty, loved it so. It was catchy
and bright and funny. It voiced their secret desires. It let them laugh away their dearest and most hidden wishes.
The tune died away in his head. Staring out at the misery of the Pocket, it simply faded away. Golke could see
through its reassuring lie.
This was where he wanted to be. This was where he needed to be.
Not anywhere but here. Right here. And right now.
The rain fell harder, sizzling on the poisoned ground, gushing through the crippled drainage of the mill. It was so
intense that within fifteen minutes the air had cleared and the sky had become greyer and bigger.
Dorden used his atmosphere sniffer and declared that the gas-level had dropped under advised limits.
Gratefully, the troopers began to unbuckle their hoods.
The open air was cold and damp, and retained the metallic scent of the gas, muddled with rot and soaked earth.
Some of the men were so relieved to be out of their hoods, they started laughing and chatting. Gaunt got Beltayn to
circuit the mill and relay orders for them to hold it down.
Zweil, his head bared again, said a blessing to the sky, and then went back to Sicre and Mkwyl. Both were dead,
and he’d said last rites over both of them already. Now he repeated the duty. “So they can hear me,” he told Dorden.
It was getting darker. Apart from drifting streams of artillery smoke, they could see for several kilometres. The sky
was turning black, and the lights of the lines, both friend and foe, were visible. Over in the east, the false dawn of a
flare barrage lit the landscape white. From the south came the flashes and glows of the counter-push. Beyond the
eastern horizon, the great blinks of light from the super-siege guns backlit the land.
Overhead, in the dark, muddy blue, Gaunt could see stars, for the first time since he’d set foot on Aexe Cardinal.
They were twinkling and blurred by the thinning smoke in the upper atmosphere, but he could make them out. Every
now and then, a red or orange line scored the sky as rockets flew over. Part of the Peinforq Line — Sector 56, Gaunt
guessed — began to strobe as it started off the night’s barrage. They could hear the whine and squeal of shells in
flight. Fires began to burn along the reciprocal edge of the Shadik lines.
Mortars pounded from somewhere. Feldkannone crumped. Another night on the Front began.
“What happened?” Gaunt asked. He led Raglon to a quieter corner of the mill ruin and sat him down. Raglon was
strung out and shaking.
“I’m sorry, sir,” he said.
“What for?”
“For fething up so badly.”
“Skip it, sergeant. What happened last night?”
“We got pounced on. We were following a dead trench and we ran smack into enemy raiders. The fight didn’t last
long. But it was furious. Back and forth, almost single file. We gave a decent account, I think. They fell back and we
moved north, dragging the wounded with us, hoping to join up with ten. We’d heard Criid had taken the mill.”
“And?”
Raglon sighed. “I don’t know how much we missed them by, but they’d already fallen back. The enemy had begun
to shell. So we stayed put. It seemed like the right choice. I thought I could feasibly hold the mill, even cut to half
strength.”
“Any contact in the night?”
“None, sir.”
Gaunt nodded. “Did you leave any men behind, Raglon?”
“No, sir!”
“Then I think you did all right. You should stop bearing yourself up.”
Raglon looked at Gaunt. “I thought you’d take my pins right away, sir.”
“For what, Rags?”
“For fething up. For losing so many men.”
“One of my earliest actions, Rags. One of my first real command actions, you understand, I led a ten-man unit of
Hyrkans into a forest ward on Folion. We had been told it had been cleared. It had not. I lost seven men. Seventy per
cent losses. I hated myself for it, but I retained my rank. Oktar knew I’d just got myself into a bad place. It happens. It
happens to all Guards, sooner or later. When you’re in a position of authority, it seems to matter all the more. You
did all right. You were just unlucky.”
Raglon nodded, but he still seemed unsettled. “I just hate the responsibility—”
“Of the deaths?”
“And the mistake…”
Gaunt paused. “Raglon, this is your first real test of command. Not the fight, not the actions afterwards. Truth is the
test. If it all went off the way you say it did, fine. If you’re covering for someone, then it’s not. If you want to be an
officer in my regiment, then you have to deal in the truth, right from the start. So… is there anything else you want to
tell me?”
“I was in command, sir.”
“Yes, you were. So who fethed up?”
“I did. I was in command.”
“Sergeant, the mark of a good squad leader is that he or she recognises weaknesses and brings them to the
attention of his commanding officer. Take it on the chin by all means. Feth knows, you’ll have to live with the pain.
But if there’s a loose link, tell me now.”
Raglon sighed. “I think we’d have run into the raiders anyway, although I’m told Scout Suth had advance warning.
I had allowed myself to be spaced too far back in the file. As I understand it, Trooper Costin blew our cover.”
“How?”
“He was drinking on duty, sir. He gave away our position by failing to observe proper stealth discipline.” Gaunt
nodded and got to his feet.
“For the God-Emperor’s sake, sir!” Raglon moaned. “Don’t!”
“Sergeant Adare, may the Emperor rest him, advised me of Costin’s unguarded drinking last year. Adare should
have come down on it. I should have come down on it. At the very least, I should have warned you about it when you
took over seventeen. This is my fault, primarily, and then Adare’s, long before it’s yours. First and foremost, it’s
Costin’s.”
“Sir…”
“Speak?”
“I only got half my platoon out of that trench. Please don’t reduce the number of survivors.”
Gaunt put a hand on Raglon’s shoulder. “See to your duty and regret nothing. I’ll see to mine. You’ll make a first
class platoon leader, Raglon.”
Gaunt walked through the mill. Mkoll hurried up to him.
“Sir?”
“In a moment, Mkoll.”
Gaunt reached the dingy alcove of rockcrete where Costin was lying. Dorden was changing the dressings of the
trooper’s shattered hand.
The doctor looked up, and recognised the grim set of Gaunt’s face.
“No,” he said, rising. “No. No way, Gaunt. Not now. He’s half bled to death and I’ve spent the last twenty minutes
saving his hand.”
“I’m sorry,” said Gaunt.
“Fething no! No, I said! I will not stand by and let you do this! Where the feth is your humanity? I respected you,
Gaunt! I’d have followed you to the ends of the worlds, because you weren’t like the others! That shit at the triage
station… that I understood! I hated you for it, but I forgave you! But not this.”
“He confessed to you, then?”
“It all came out,” Dorden looked down at Costin. “He told me about it. He’s traumatised. Remorseful. Suicidal,
probably.”
“Suicide is no option. His laxity caused the death of several Ghosts.”
“So what? You’ll shoot him for it?”
“Yes,” said Ibram Gaunt.
Dorden stood in front of Costin. “Through me then. Go on, you bastard. Do it.”
Gaunt slid his bolt pistol from its holster. “Stand aside, Doctor.”
“I will not. I fething well will not.”
“Stand aside doctor, or I will have you stood aside.”
Dorden leaned in, standing on tip-toe so his eyes were level with Gaunt’s. “Shoot me,” he snarled. “Go on. I’m
defying your orders. If Costin deserves the bullet for breaking your orders, so do I. So, shoot me. Or have everyone
know you as an inconsistent leader… one rule for one, another for another.”
Gaunt didn’t blink. He slowly raised the bolt pistol until the muzzle was pressing at Dorden’s adam’s apple.
“You’re forcing an issue that shouldn’t be forced, doctor. You are the backbone of the First, depended on by
everyone. You are loved by the men. I consider myself lucky to count you as a friend. But if you choose to take a
stand on this, I will shoot you. It is my duty. My duty to the Guard, to the Warmaster and to the God-Emperor of
Mankind. I cannot make exceptions. Not Costin. Not you. Please, doctor… stand aside.”
“I will not.”
Gaunt raised the bolter a little so that Dorden was forced to tilt his head back. “Please, doctor. Stand aside”
“I will not.”
“We are mirrors, Tolin, you and me. Mirrors of war. I break them. You put them back together. For every gramme
of your soul that wishes war would end, mine matches it tenfold. But until the killing ends, I won’t back down from
my duty. Don’t make the next round I fire be the one that kills Tolin Dorden.”
“You really would shoot me,” Dorden marvelled softly, “wouldn’t you?”
“Yes.”
“Holy feth… then that just makes me want to stand here all the more.” Gaunt’s finger tightened on the trigger.
Tighter. Tighter.
He turned away and lowered the weapon, clicking on the safety.
“Tolin,” he said quietly. “You’ve just undermined me in front of my men. You’ve just weakened my authority. I’m
glad to the bottom of my heart that I couldn’t shoot you, because of our friendship. But I hope you’re ready to cope
with the consequences.”
“There won’t be any consequences, Ibram,” Dorden said. “Oh yes, there will,” said Gaunt. “Oh, most certainly
there will.”
Mkoll stood nearby, alarmed by the confrontation. For a minute, he’d thought Gaunt was going to ask him to step in
and bundle Dorden away.
He should have known better. Gaunt would never involve another man in a personal fight.
But it was bad. There wasn’t a trooper in the First who’d take a gun to Doc Dorden. The idea was criminal. Time
would tell what Gaunt’s loss of face would lead to.
The stand-off had shown Gaunt was human. Ironically, that wasn’t necessarily a good thing. Even more ironically,
most of the First probably knew it already.
Gaunt stood alone for a few minutes. Around the mill, troopers whispered to each other. The Colonel-Commissar
suddenly turned and walked back towards Costin. A hush fell. Dorden looked up from treating another man and saw
where Gaunt was heading. He rose, but Milo stopped him.
“Don’t,” whispered Milo. “Not all over again.”
“But—”
“Milo’s right,” said Mkoll, stepping closer to the pair. “Don’t.”
Gaunt crouched down by Costin and took off his cap. He smoothed out the brim.
Costin lay against the pock-marked wall, fear overlaying the pain in his face.
“This is a regiment to be proud of, Costin,” Gaunt said finally.
“Yes, sir.”
“We stick up for one another. Look out for one another. That’s the way we’ve always done it. It’s the way I like it.”
“Yes, sir.”
“The doctor is my friend. We don’t see eye to eye on some things, but that’s the mark of friendship, isn’t it? I think
you deserve to be executed. Right here and now, because of your neglect. The doctor believes otherwise. I’m not
about to shoot him. It turns out in fact, I couldn’t even if I thought it was the correct thing to do. So that puts me in a
hard place. I have to be fair. Even-handed. If I don’t shoot him for breaking orders, I can’t very well shoot you for
the same, can I? So you should consider yourself lucky.”
“I do, sir.”
“You should also know I hold you in the deepest contempt for what you did. I can never trust you. Your comrades
can never trust you. Many, in fact, may hate you for this. You better watch your back.”
“Yes, sir.”
Gaunt put his cap back on. “Consider this your first and only chance. Clean up your act. From this moment
onwards. Become the model of the perfect trooper. Prove Dorden right. If I see you take another drink, ever, or if I
learn from others that you have, on duty or off, I will come down on you with the fury of a righteous god. It’s all up to
you.”
“Sir?”
“What?”
“I’m… I’m sorry. Truly sorry.”
Gaunt got to his feet. “Words, Costin. Just words. Actions speak louder. Don’t tell me you’re sorry. Be sorry.”
Good advice, Gaunt mused to himself as he rejoined Mkoll. Deeds not words. Time was getting on and they were in
danger of losing the lead they’d gained earlier. Either they moved on the Shadik lines now, or packed it in.
Gaunt called Golke, Beltayn and the platoon leaders to join them.
“I estimate from the light flashes the target guns are about seven kilometres away, sir,” Mkoll said. “North-east It
could be more, given their range, but their firing lights are brighter than the last time I saw them so they’ve like as not
moved up.”
“They’re heavy. Rail-mounted. Do the Shadik have tracks in that area, count?”
Golke shrugged. “There was a rail line up the east side of the Naeme Valley, years ago, but these days? No one
from the Alliance has seen past the Shadik front in decades. Even our aerial obs is limited. Of course, they may well
have purpose-built something.”
“So how do we get there?” Gaunt said, inviting opinions.
“It’s straight across no-man’s-land,” said Domor. “About a kilometre and a half from here. There’s some decent
cover apart from the last few hundred metres. We’d have to go slow, the Ghost way.”
“What about this dugout Criid?” Gaunt asked.
She walked them to the back of the mill and showed them the pile of blast-collapsed rabble that marked the tunnel
mouth. “I’ve every reason to think this runs right back to their lines,” she said. “A covered arterial route for getting
obs patrols back and forth from the mill. I’d have checked it if there’d been time last night, but there wasn’t, so I
sealed it.”
“Something Raglon and his boys are grateful for, no doubt. You used a single tube?”
“Yes sir.”
“So, if we clear this opening, the rest of the ran should be sound?”
“They’ll have it guarded,” Golke said. “They may well even be trying to clear it now.”
Mkoll shook his head. “I can’t hear anything. No sounds of picks or shovels. I think they’ve just assumed we hold
the mill now. Either that, or they haven’t had time to detail sappers in.”
“If we go that way, we can be on them a lot quicker,” Gaunt mused. “It’s going to get nasty at the far end,
whichever way we go. I think I’d rather come up through a guarded tunnel and take my chances. The alternative, as
Domor said, is a ran at the lines, and that could get messy.”
“We’d still have to clear it,” said Golke.
Gaunt smiled. “An opportunity for the Verghastite element of the First to shine. Arcuda… round up every man you
can find who used to be a miner or an ore worker. We need six or seven. Any more and they’ll be getting in each
other’s way Move Dremmond and Lubba in to cover them. We’ll flame the hole the moment anything moves.”
Arcuda nodded and hurried off.
Gaunt looked at the rest of them. “Once we go, we’ll have to work to fluid plans. This is going to be hit and run.
Opportunistic. We’re going to need everyone ready to improvise. Best case, we find these weapons and throw a rod
in their spokes. Worst case, we simply find them and relay their precise location back to the Alliance. Everyone
clear on that? Minimum result is locate. Any questions?”
“What about the wounded?” asked Mkoll. There were seven men from seventeen unfit to move.
“They stay here. Zweil stays with them, along with a backstop team. I’ll select it. Anything else?”
“One thing that might be useful, sir,” said Beltayn. “I’ve been monitoring vox traffic. About five minutes ago, the
Alliance distributed the signal ‘rogue behj’.”
“By which they mean?”
“There’s another assault due,” said Golke. “The counter-push must have produced results in the 57th. GSC must
have decided to capitalise on that, and send out a second wave. What was the qualifying code, Beltayn?”
“Eleven one decimal two, sir.”
Golke nodded, impressed. “They’re coming on force. Right across 57th and 58th. We can expect a serious
bombardment to start with, and then skirmishers followed by main assault. This part of the front is going to be lively
tonight.”
“Works in our favour,” said Gaunt. “Confusion, line assault. We couldn’t want for better distractions. And being
underground during the bombardment can’t hurt either.”
“Unless a stray shell brings the roof down,” muttered Criid.
Her pessimism made Gaunt laugh.
“Let’s get set,” he told them. “The clock’s running. I want to be coming up on the Shadik lines during or after the
first assault. Then we play it as it comes.”
Arcuda had rounded up six Verghastites with mine experience: Trillo, Ezlan, Gunsfeld, Subeno, Pozetine and, of
course, Kolea. Stripped down, they got to work with their nine-seventies and their bare hands. Other troops were
brought in to form chains and clear the rabble the Verghastites were digging out. Lubba and Dremmond, their flamers
ready, stood by to hose the opening if anything stirred.
Gaunt stood and watched the work for a while. He was fascinated by Gol Kolea. Criid had had to explain to
Kolea what was needed, because his mind lacked even the most basic memories of his long years as a miner in
Number Seventeen Deep Working, Vervunhive. But his body had not forgotten the skills. He set to work, relentless,
inexhaustible, clearing the rabble and dirt with expert efficiency. He wasn’t just a powerful man mucking in, he knew
what he was doing. He was able to advise on clearance and support measures. He set up the work chain so it moved
effectively.
Except he didn’t know what he was doing. It was all automatic. The physical memory of mining practices
informed his limbs. His eyes were vacant.
Gaunt considered that of all the men the First had lost, Kolea was the one to be most dearly mourned. A superb
soldier. A fine leader. If it hadn’t been for Ouranberg, Kolea might have made serious rank in the Ghosts.
Most of all, Gaunt missed Kolea’s quiet, insightful character.
When men died, you simply mourned their absence. The lack of them. You missed their presence. He could think
of many like that: Baffels, Adare, Doyl, Cluggan, Maroy, Cocoer, Rilke, Lerod, Hasker, Bam, Blane, Bragg…
God-Emperor! That was just scratching the surface.
But with Kolea it was worse. He was still there, in body, in voice. A constant reminder of the warrior they’d lost.
Gaunt walked back from the tunnel mouth and found Milo.
“Got a duty for you,” he said. “Ready and willing, sir,” said Milo.
“I want you to hold this mill. Zweil’s staying, and the wounded need looking after. I also want a team here in case
we come back in a hurry. You and four men. You’ve the command, so you pick.”
Milo looked crestfallen. He was clearly disappointed not to be advancing with the main mission.
“Isn’t there someone better suited for the job, sir?” he asked.
“Like?”
“Arcuda? Raglon? They’ve both got rank. And they’re—”
“They’re what, Milo?”
Inexperienced, Milo wanted to say. “Good choices,” he said, uncertainly.
Gaunt sighed and nodded. Milo had turned out to be a first class soldier, with a real promise of leadership
qualities, despite his age. Either of the suggestions — Arcuda, green and nervous, and Raglon, shaken and tired —
would make more sense. Indeed, Gaunt knew he’d rather have Milo in his fire-team than either of the sergeants.
There was another reason for his choice, one that had been nagging at him for days. He wanted to tell Milo about
the old Sororitas woman in the forgotten woodland chapel, but every time he turned it over in his mind, it sounded
stupid. He didn’t really even believe it himself.
She’d said Milo was important. Not here, important elsewhere. Then again, she’d been barking mad.
If, he acknowledged to himself, she’d even been there at all. That whole incident had taken on a very dreamlike
quality in his head.
But Ibram Gaunt had been alive long enough to know that the galaxy moved in ways far stranger than he could ever
divine. His whole life had been bisected and intercut with mysterious truths and consequences. Coincidences.
Destinies. Truths that didn’t seem to be truths until years afterwards.
He could not risk it. He could not risk Milo. “I want you to do it,” he said. “I trust you. Think of it as a test.”
“A test, sir?”
“Maroy’s dead, Milo. Sixteen platoon needs a new sergeant. I’m considering you for that. Get on with your duty,
and I’ll consider you more seriously. Pick your four.”
Milo shrugged. He was quite taken aback by the prospect of a promotion and a command. At Vervunhive, it had
been a toss up between Milo and Baffels, and Gaunt had given the command to Baffels on the basis of age and
experience. Milo was so very young. But war had aged him since then. So had experience. Gaunt knew that if he
offered the rank to Milo now, it wouldn’t be turned down. He wasn’t a boy anymore. Vervunhive, Hagia, Phantine
and Aexe Cardinal had turned him into a soldier.
“So?” said Gaunt. “Your four?”
“I’ll need a sniper, Nessa.”
That made sense. Milo and Nessa had formed a good bond during the Ouranberg raid.
“A flamer to cover the tunnel. Dremmond. Beyond that… I dunno. Mosark? Mkillian?”
“You’ve got them. Do me proud. If we’re not back by dawn, retreat towards the line if you can. Identifier from me
is ‘piper’, challenge is ‘boy’. Failing that, one long tap and two short ones. Make sure it’s not us before you get
Dremmond to roast the tunnel.”
Milo nodded.
“Watch Zweil. He can be a handful. Consider yourself in receipt of the brevet rank of sergeant.”
“Thank you, sir.”
Gaunt smiled and saluted Milo. Milo returned the gesture. “You’ve come a long way from Tanith Magna, Brin. Be
proud of yourself.”
“I am, sir.”
The hole was a dark, sinister space. “Clear?” hissed Gaunt. Two micro-bead taps from Mkoll said yes. “Advance,”
Gaunt said.
The infiltration team filed quickly into the dugout run Mkoll and Domor had the lead, followed by Lubba and
Hwlan. Gaunt was right behind them with Bonin.
Initially, the earth-dug tunnel dropped away rather sharply The floor was a congealed mass of soil-waste. But after
about ten metres, it levelled out and its nature changed. Rather than earth-cut walls, the tunnel was made of
mouldering stone, old, but well-laid. It reminded Gaunt of a storm-drain or a sewer.
It was far too elaborate and significant to have been built to cover Republican troops out to the forward
observation point at the mill. This was ancient. Gaunt realised it was most likely some part of the mill’s old watersystem,
a drain or possibly a feeder sluice. The Shadik had unearthed it and put it to use.
It was quite narrow and low, and the wet, slime-covered stones were treacherous, especially in the near-pitch
darkness. They dared not use lamp packs for fear of advertising their approach. That was why he’d put Sergeant
Domor in the lead. “Shoggy” Domor had been blinded on Menazoid Epsilon, and his eyes had been replaced with
bulky augmetic optics, which made him resemble a certain bug-eyed amphibian and thus earned him his nickname.
Domor adjusted his optics to night-vision mode.
After a further twenty metres, the tunnel dropped again, this time suddenly, and they had to wade through kneedeep
water. There was greater damage to the stone work — evidently this part of the tunnel had subsided or dropped
badly.
Gaunt looked back down the file. His eyes had adjusted to the gloom, as much as they were going to, anyway. He
could see grey-black shapes moving against the darkness, and hear the occasional splash or clink of rock. It was hard
effort, and the men were trying to keep their breathing quiet. It was also hot and airless, and everyone was sweating
freely.
About three hundred metres along, Mkoll called a stop. A secondary tunnel opened up to the left, also stone-built,
and water gurgled out of it. They waited while the master scout checked it. A minute. Two. Three.
Then a double-tap on the micro-bead link.
Gaunt risked vocals, keeping his voice low. “One, four?”
“Four, one,” Mkoll responded, barely audible. “A side chute. Dead-end. It’s collapsed.”
They moved on. In the space of the next two hundred metres, three more side chutes opened. The party waited as
Mkoll checked each one scrupulously.
A few minutes more, and Gaunt felt cool air moving past his face. He could smell water. In another step or two, he
could hear it. A torrent, fast moving.
The tunnel opened out Gaunt couldn’t see enough, but he could feel the space in front of him.
“Some kind of vault,” Domor reported over the link. There was a sudden scrabbling noise and a low curse.
“Report!” Gaunt said.
“Lubba nearly slipped over. Sir, I think we’re going to have to risk lamps.”
“How clear is the way ahead?”
“No sign of contact. Wait.”
They heard soft boot-steps on stone, a wooden creak, and then it fell silent for a few seconds. “Domor?”
“It’s clear. I think we should use lamps. Someone’s gonna fall, otherwise.”
“Your call, Domor, you’re in the best position to decide.”
“Do it, sir.”
“Two lamps only. Hwlan. Bonin.”
The scouts switched on their packs. The pools of light they cast seemed alarmingly bright. They illuminated the
chamber, and Gaunt realised at once that Domor had been correct.
The tunnel they had been following came out halfway up the stone walls of a deep cistern area. It dropped away
below them. Narrow, rail-less stone steps led down from the tunnel to a stone buttress where lengths of duckboards
had been placed as a bridge across the gap over onto a matching but-tress. From there, another flight of steps led up
to the resumption of the tunnel. Domor was on the far side, crouched at the top of the opposite steps, watching the
way ahead.
There was nothing to hold on to, and every surface was dripping with slime. Without the light, a good many of
them would have lost their footing on either set of steps, and the narrow duckboard bridge would have been
impossible to negotiate.
Far below them, water thundered through the bottom of the stone vault.
Holding his lamp, Hwlan went across the bridge. He stood at the foot of the opposite steps to light the way. Bonin
waited with his own lamp at the bottom of the near flight.
Gaunt and Mkoll went across with Lubba. Gaunt turned back and signalled the troop to follow, single file. He
wanted Bonin and Hwlan free to move up at the front. He instructed every third man to stop and take over the job of
holding the lamps. The last man through would collect in the lamps and turn them off.
They’d been underground for about fifty minutes, and had advanced what Mkoll reckoned was about two-thirds of a
kilometre, when the barrage began.
It sounded like a distant hammering at first, then rose in volume and tempo until they could actually feel the earth
around them vibrating. Gaunt calculated there was between eight and twelve metres of solid earth above their heads,
but still everything jarred. Spoil and water squirted and dribbled out of the roof, shaken loose or forced out through
ground distortions. Every once in a while, a whole stone block popped out of the wall and fell on the floor.
Agitation rose. Gaunt could feel it. It wasn’t hard to imagine what would happen if a heavy shell scored a direct
hit above them. Crushed, suffocated, buried alive. The tunnel could cave or collapse. They’d already seen it had
done that further back.
Even the most confident Ghosts wanted to be out of this potential grave. They wanted to be taking their chances in
the open. It didn’t matter that they were probably at less risk from the shelling and the shrapnel down in the drain.
Indeed, Gaunt felt his own pulse rate rising steeply. Claustrophobia had never been a private fear of his, but down
here, like this…
The earth shook with an especially violent jar. Someone back in the line moaned in fear.
“Quiet!” Gaunt hissed.
Then he realised how stupid the comment had been. If it was loud down here, it would be deafening above ground.
The shelling would cover their noise. They could advance now at double time, not worrying about stealth.
He issued the order and they started to move, almost fleeing down the line of the tunnel. The deluge of explosives
continued to roar above them.
“Hold it!” Mkoll cried.
They skidded up. “What is it?” Gaunt asked.
“You hear that?”
Gaunt couldn’t hear anything above the shell blasts and the panting of the men. “What?”
“A scratching noise. A rattling…”
“Sacred feth!” Domor suddenly cried out. He could see further than any of them. He could see what was coming.
“Vermin!” he said in horror. “A swarm of vermin, coming this way! Oh God-Emperor!”
“Sir?” urged Lubba, slightly frantic. He had his flamer ready.
“No,” said Gaunt. The shelling might be covering their advance, but sustained flamer-bursts would be an insane
risk to take. “Stand your ground!” Gaunt said. “They’re fleeing the shelling. Just grin and bear it. That’s an order.”
The rats hit them.
A river of squealing, matted bodies, surging in a tide back along the tunnel, filling the floor space to shin-depth,
some scampering along the walls. Gaunt felt them collide with his legs, rocking him back, and then pouring around
and under him. Men cried out. The noise and stench of the living river was atrocious. The writhing pressure of the
rats’ bodies was even worse.
Frantic, seeking cover in the deeper drains, the rats clawed and bit as they swept past. Gaunt had to steady his
hands against the tunnel wall to prevent himself being knocked over. He felt sharp needle-bites on his shins and
calves.
There was a scream, and frantic activity behind him. Harjeon had been carried over, and had virtually
disappeared into the streaming mass of black bodies.
Criid and Livara struggled and swore, trying to get him up again.
We’re probably all dead, Gaunt thought to himself. All of us infected with the multitude of filthy plagues and
infections these vile things carry. Golden throne! Of all the things that I imagined might end my service to the
Imperium, it was never rats.
As suddenly as it had begun, the vermin tide stopped. A last few squeaking things scuttled by in the gloom. Gaunt
heard men stamping at them.
“Report!” he said.
There were general moans and comments of loathing. Not a single member of the mission had avoided bites or
tears. Harjeon was covered in them, and started shaking and vomiting in loathing.
“They got on my face… in my mouth—” he wailed.
“Shut him up, Criid.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Let’s move.”
The sounds of the shelling grew louder, but not because they were closer. There was a faint, cold light ahead, and the
noise of the barrage was being carried back along to them from the tunnel mouth.
Just a hundred metres to go.
Gaunt ordered Mkoll, Bonin and Hwlan forward.
“Ready order,” he said to the rest. “Straight silver. Let’s keep the surprise on our side as long as possible.”
Two taps. “Forward,” he said.
Up ahead, the three scouts emerged into the open air. It was cold and foggy from the shelling, and the shock-flashes
of blasts backlit the misted air. The sound of the barrage was deafening: whooping shell-falls, some high-pitched,
some low and basso, others still oddly melodic and expressive. Most detonations were huge and so loud they shook
the diaphragm. Others made hotter, flatter sounds. Some made no sound at all, just a flash and a quake of the ground.
After every single one there was a surging, pattering hush, like breakers on a shingle beach, as soil and shrapnel
rained down.
Finding their way by the strobing flicker of the impacts, Mkoll, Bonin and Hwlan scurried out of the tunnel mouth,
heads down. There was a sandbagged revetment and a guard point at the Shadik end of the tunnel, but it was
unmanned. The guards had fled for cover.
The scouts found themselves in a deep bay off the main fire trench. They fanned out to the exit, and then ducked
back as three Shadik troopers ran past boots clumping the duck-boards. These disappeared, and then two more came
by, carrying a screaming man on a stretcher They too vanished into the glowing smoke.
Mkoll signalled the other two up with him. They emerged into the fire trench proper. It was deeper and better laid
than the Alliance trenches, with a wider firestep and a back-slanted parapet of rockcrete blocks. The trench, as far as
they could see, which was to the next traverse, was empty.
“Move up,” Mkoll said.
A moment later, five Shadik troopers, running hell for leather, appeared round the traverse to their left. They didn’t
seem to register the Tanith until the last moment.
The scouts didn’t give them a chance to react. Mkoll brought down the first one, sliding his silver knife through
gas-mask and windpipe. Hwlan skewered another in the sternum and then propelled himself and the corpse into a
third.
Bonin crashed his rifle-butt into the belly of the enemy soldier nearest him, and sent him tumbling away, winded,
then put his weight into a stinging sidekick that snapped the fifth trooper’s neck and dropped him abruptly onto the
duck-boards. Bonin leapt over him, and quickly killed the winded man with his bare hands.
Hwlan tried to make a clean kill of the last trooper, but the fether was struggling hard. The Tanith man got his
lasrifle braced across the man’s neck and wrenched it around, twisting the helmeted skull down hard against the
trench floor.
Five men dealt with in just a few seconds.
They were dragging the bodies into cover behind the camo-nets of a funk hole as Gaunt led the first of the main
party into the fire trench.
“Which way?” Gaunt asked.
Mkoll pointed left.
“Lead off with Hwlan,” Gaunt told him. He turned to Bonin “Set here with Oflyn, and take up the rear of the file.
Stay in close contact.”
“Sir,” nodded Bonin.
The party moved off quickly behind Mkoll and Hwlan. Two scouts at the head and two at the rear was the best
insurance Gaunt could muster.
Beyond the second traverse they came to, a Shadik fire-team was trying to set up a pair of autocannons at the
parapet. Nine men, all told.
Mkoll and Hwlan came at them from behind, knives out Gaunt followed them, drawing his power sword, along
with Criid, Ezlan and LaSalle. Brutal killing followed. One of the Shadik got a shot off, but Gaunt hoped its sound
would be drowned by the barrage. He decapitated a man with his sword, and then impaled another. Nothing stopped
his ancient blade, not mail-armour, not battle-plate, not leather and certainly not flesh.
Criid finished off the last man, and looked up at Gaunt.
The shelling had just suddenly ceased.
That meant the ground attack was coming. And it also meant that the Shadik would be streaming back out of their
bunkers and shelters to man the step and repel.
THIRTEEN
CORPSE LIGHT
“Sometimes, y’know, I really miss my slum. Times like this, for instance.”
—Flame-Trooper Lubba
Fifteen regiments of Alliance troops assaulted the line in the wake of the barrage. A wave attack, welling up from the
smoke-skeined darkness of no-man’s-land. The twenty-kilometre stretch of line had been lit up for half an hour by the
salvos of the bombardment. After a moment’s eerie silence, it lit up again. Small-arms. Machine guns. Grenades.
Flamers. From the air, the wide band of massive light bursts reduced to a thinner, fizzling line of fire.
It was the most significant attack mounted on the Shadik line in eighteen months. An offensive, the officers of the
GSC were calling it back in the safety of the rear-line bunkers. Lyntor-Sewq and Martane had been prepping for it
since Lyntor-Sewq’s promotion to supreme commander. Lyntor-Sewq had dearly wanted to make his mark early, and
prove to the high sezar how lax his predecessor, Count Golke, had been in his accomplishments. It was all part of a
greater strategy that incorporated the northern push through Gibsgatte, where the supreme commander had invested
the bulk of his Imperial Guard armour. The idea was to sucker punch Shadik by a northern thrust and then take him
hard in the belly at the Pocket and Bassin-on-Naeme. Lyntor-Sewq’s overall scheme was to divert the enemy’s
strengths to the north and retake the river valley, establishing a new front he called the Frergarten Line before winter
set in. If successful, the Peinforq Line would become obsolete for the first time in twenty-six years.
Over winter, the new line could be reinforced using Alliance troops, and be ready by spring not only to hold
against the inevitable counter-push, but also to launch an invasion of the Southern Republic, in concerted effort with
the Kottmark armies on the Ostlund Line.
It was an over-ambitious scheme, typical of a new commander trying to be emphatic and break the deadlock
apparently imposed by his predecessor. If Golke had been privy to the planning meetings, he’d have been able to tell
Lyntor-Sewq frankly that the same thing had been tried before, three times, in point of fact. The “Oust-and-Out”
strategy was an old one, and it had never worked.
If Ibram Gaunt had been privy to the planning meetings, his comments would have been earthier still. Lyntor-Sewq
was playing the war like a game of regicide. The first thing a commander learns that’s of any use at all is that army
groups do not behave like playing pieces. They don’t obey set rules, they don’t have preset “moves”. Often a strong
group signally fails to do what was expected of it. Often, too, a “weak” piece can win the game by being used
cleverly.
Unfortunately, neither officer was present at the meetings. By the time it was getting too late to advise Lyntor-
Sewq differently, both Gaunt and Golke, the latter by choice, were at the sharp end of things.
Van Voytz was at the meetings, most of them anyway. His counselling efforts were completely eclipsed by the
determination of the new supreme commander. When, months later. Van Voytz finally withdrew from Aexe Cardinal,
he would come to regard his time there as the most frustrating and impotent of his career.
Most GSC staffers believed that this particular night had been chosen to launch the offensive because of the
opening the counter-strike at 57th had provided. Its success had jibed in a timely way with the frontal press at
Gibsgatte. This was only partially true.
Though Gaunt never learned the truth, the offensive had been launched because of Redjacq Ankre. Discovering,
from logged notes, that the First was infiltrating that night, he’d persuaded Martane to put the call in. Ankre was a
proud man. His pride would eventually cost him his life, many years later. He hated the idea that the Tanith could
have found an opening, and he used that hate to fuel his persuasive powers. If the stealthers of the First could break
the Shadik line, then so could the Alliance ground forces. Ankre was actually afraid that the off-worlders of the
Guard might actually achieve something that the Alliance had failed to do. He could not stomach the idea.
He personified the emotion-led failing of the Alliance top brass, a failing that had prolonged this war by decades.
As with all efforts of such scale, his failing went unnoticed in the general scheme of things.
Almost three thousand Alliance troops fell casualty on the line assault that night. No figure, not even an estimation,
was made for the Shadik forces. At one stretch of the line, one hundred and seventy-eight men of the Genswick Foot,
including Lieutenant Fevrierson, became encumbered in lines of wire and were slaughtered by machine guns. At
another section, no more than fifty metres long, three hundred Fichuan infantrymen died in the storm charge. The
trench filled up, level with the surrounding terrain, packed with bodies so deeply the Shadik were forced to fall back
and hold a reserve trench. Trench mortars killed sixty men of the Meuport Fifth as they came towards the parapet and
were illuminated by starshells sent up by a nearby Bransgatte unit who had become disoriented. The surviving men
of the Meuport Fifth later took the fire trench, held it for an hour, lost it again and then retook it before dawn. The
action entered their regimental legend.
At the northern tip of the assault, a detachment of strathid cavalry overran the held position under cover of
autocannons, and stormed the main reserve trench. Then a counter-strike of gas shells and nail grenades broke their
sturdy advance and left them dead and dying. Hussars, individually untouched, lay twitching and screaming in the
foggy dark, sharing through the mind-links the death-throes of their wounded mounts. Alliance troopers advancing
through the area started to mercy kill the birds, and then found themselves, in tearful desperation, mercy killing the
hussars too. They could not bear the screams.
The Kottstadt Wyverns, under Major Benedice, assaulted, took and held a kilometre stretch of fire trench, and then
storm-fought their way back down the communication alleys to secure a line of gun-pits. South of them, a brigade of
Mittel Aexe dragoons, the Seventh Ghrennes or “Steeplers”, did likewise, and then tried to spike the guns and
destroy their munitions. Ninety-three men were incinerated when a high explosive dump was enthusiastically flamed,
blowing a hole in the earth two hundred metres in diameter. The rest of them, along with a fair number of Wyverns,
subsequently died in the clouds of toxic gas that spewed from storage pits ruptured by the main blast.
All the while, set far back, the Shadik super-siege guns continued to bombard. Their immense shells broke shield
umbrellas on the Peinforq Line, and obliterated an ammunition dump, a command bunker, nineteen artillery stations
— including five heavy howitzer mounts — a sector infirmary and a reserve trench full of young, conscripted
Fichuans who thought they’d managed to skip the war for a night.
Some of the massive shells even struck Peinforq itself. The Manorial House was destroyed, and the abattoir, along
with the burial chapel, two cafes, and a street of billet-housing full of Krassian troopers.
Despite the monumental losses, the Alliance offensive didn’t lose momentum that night, or the day after. Lyntor-
Sewq, determined to press for the victory he saw beckoning, deployed greater and greater numbers into the push
until it ran out of steam on the fourth day and he conceded defeat.
But for Gaunt’s mission, that was in the unknowable future. By midnight on that first night of offensive, they were a
kilometre inside the Shadik lines, following a supply trench.
All hell was breaking loose behind them at the Shadik front, lighting up the sky and filling the valley with smoke
fumes.
But they were pushing forward, silent, relentless, into the depths of the enemy fortifications.
Corpse light broke above them, white and pale. More flares. The roar of the battle was distant and muffled. They’d
just slaughtered twelve Shadik infantrymen in their fifth skirmish of the night. The First had suffered no losses so far,
but Gaunt wondered how much longer they would be able to work with blades alone.
The sound of the siege guns was deafening now, even though they were still several kilometres away. The ground
vibrated, not from impacts but from firing.
“I’d say there were six guns at least,” Mkoll told Gaunt. “I’ve been counting the flashes and the rhythm.”
“Seven,” said Bonin. “Definitely seven.”
“If Bonin says seven, seven it is,” said Mkoll. “He’s got an ear for these things.”
“How far?” asked Gaunt.
“Well, it’s not like we can’t find them,” said Mkoll, pointing to the superheated flashes of discharge lighting up the
northeastern sky.
“Yes,” said Gaunt, “But there’s no sense of scale. How far?”
“Two, maybe three kilometres.”
Gaunt sighed and looked around. The supply trench system they were in was dark and quiet. Everything had been
pushed towards the front.
Once in a while, Shadik personnel appeared, and were knifed to silence by the Ghosts.
But Gaunt knew they’d been lucky. All it would take was for them to meet an advancing brigade head on.
Then it would come down to firepower. Firepower and numbers.
If only they had a decent fix on the guns. Something concrete to take back with them. He’d told them all that locate
was the minimum requirement of the mission.
Two or three kilometres to the north-east wasn’t precise enough.
Round the next traverse of the supply trench, they found themselves in a deep ammunition corridor laid with track.
It was twice the width of the infantry burrows, and ran northeast, dead straight.
The feeder roads for the big guns. Wide enough to take the girth of the shells on munition trains.
They were dosing on it.
“Fan out and follow,” Gaunt ordered, and dropped his team into the bottom of the wide, man-made gulley.
A rifle cracked, twice. Trooper Sekko convulsed and fell.
Gaunt looked back and saw Shadik elements emerging from the gloom, weapons blazing. The Ghosts returned fire,
lasguns cracking. Lubba spat fire down the wide space of the ammunition corridor.
The game was up. They’d been rumbled.
FOURTEEN
THE FIRST STAND
“This one’s for Try.”
—Hlaine Larkin
“What does it mean?” Feygor asked, angry.
“It means trouble,” said Caffran.
“What sort of trouble?” Feygor snapped.
“I don’t know! I agreed the word with Ven before he left. If he found trouble, that was the signal: ‘Comeuppance’.
I don’t even know if it was him who sent it or Jajjo.”
“Anything else? Anything more?” Feygor asked. Rerval looked up from the micro-bead set he’d been playing
with. “Nothing. Not enough gain. Now, if my main set was working—”
“Feth take your main set,” Feygor replied. He sat down at the kitchen table and drummed his fingers in agitation.
“Define trouble,” he said, looking at Caffran.
“Ven wasn’t specific. It could mean they’ve run into enemy scouts, a patrol… maybe brigands… maybe Jajjo’s
fallen and broken a leg… or it could be there’s an entire army group moving this way.”
“Next time you agree on a code word, you fether, make sure you know what it means!”
Caffran looked Feygor in the eyes. “At least I bothered to check with him before he left. You just let him walk out
of here.”
“Shut your damn mouth,” Feygor growled. He looked round at the others. They were all watching the exchange.
“Pack your kits. We’re leaving.”
“What?” cried Caffran.
“You heard me! We’ve no idea what’s coming. There’s eight of us here. What good are we going to do holding a
place like this?”
Brostin and Cuu began to head for the door. “I’m not going,” said Caffran. They stopped in their tracks. “I gave
you a fething order,” said Feygor, slowly rising to his feet.
“And you can stick it. Mkvenner asked me to secure this place until he got back. So that’s what I’m doing. A
strong-point. We’ve been building cover around the back area.”
“Who’s we?” asked Gutes.
“Me, Muril, Rerval and Larks. You lot can split if you want. I’m not going to let Ven and Jajjo down. If they sent
the signal, they meant it. And given the range on the beads, they can’t be more than a few kilometres away. So… go if
you want to.”
“I gave you an order,” Feygor repeated, malevolently.
“Any notion that you’re actually in charge vanished when you decided to take a holiday here. You’ve hardly been
following orders since we arrived, so don’t give me that. We’re staying, at least until Ven gets here or we hear more
from him.”
Feygor’s glare moved across their faces. “You all feel this way?”
“Yes,” said Rerval.
“I’m staying,” said Muril.
Larkin just nodded.
“I’m staying too,” said Gutes suddenly. He looked at the old woman huddled in the corner. “I don’t think she’s
going anywhere, not if she’s stayed here this long. I ain’t leaving her for the wolves.”
“Feth it!” said Feygor. He looked at Brostin and Cuu.
“I’m with you, Murt, sure as sure,” said Cuu. “Just say the word.”
Brostin shrugged. He looked uncomfortable.
Feygor scratched his neck. The idea of running clearly appealed to him but he was considering the consequences.
If trouble was that close, they’d stand a better chance of survival here as a group than alone and moving through the
forest.
“Okay,” said Feygor, “okay, we stay. For now. Prepare for con-tart. Caffran, get everyone deployed.”
The Ghosts began to ready themselves, Brostin and Cuu hurrying out of the kitchen to gather kit. Feygor turned and
faced the Aexe trooper Caffran had found.
“Of course, we haven’t even started with you,” he said. “Get talking.”
The dishevelled young man refused to make eye contact. Feygor hit him and knocked him onto the floor. He was
about to hit him again when Caffran grabbed his arm.
“He’s a deserter. That much is obvious, isn’t it? He ran into these woods and he’s been hiding here, probably
because it was out of the way and the old lady fed him.”
“Why?”
“Gak it, Feygor,” said Muril, “how dense do you have to be? She must think it’s her son, come home again after all
this time.”
“This sounding like the truth to you?” Feygor asked the young man, who was picking himself up.
“Don’t hurt her. Please,” he whispered.
“And don’t hit him again in front of her,” Caffran advised. “If she does think he’s her son, you might find yourself
with a bread knife stuck in your back.”
“What’s your name?” Muril asked the young man.
“Private First Class Rufo Peterik, Sixteenth Brunsgatters.”
“How long ago did you… ran?” Caffran asked gently.
“Six months,” said Peterik.
“You been here ever since?”
“Couple of months living rough, then here.”
“Did you disable my vox-caster?” Rerval asked from across the kitchen. It was a blunt but obvious question. It
was just the sort of thing a desperate deserter might have done.
“No, sir,” said Peterik straight away. “I did not.”
“We haven’t got time for this,” said Feygor. “Lock him up or tie him to a chair. Or something.”
There was no point objecting. None of them could predict what the youth might do, though Caffran had a hunch
they didn’t have to worry about him. Caffran tied him to a chair anyway.
“Piet, Larks… sweep the ground,” said Feygor. His manner was calmer now. Having made the decision to stay, he
was eager to reimpose his leadership.
Both Larkin and Gutes looked at Caffran first and only left the kitchen when he nodded.
Outside, the mist had grown heavier, gauzing out the rising sun. There was no wind, but the air had a tang of rain.
They still hadn’t quite shaken off that storm.
Larkin and Gutes hurried up the back lawn, following the line of the garden wall, their boots and trouser legs
becoming soaked with dew from the wet undergrowth.
It was terribly still, terribly quiet. Birds called intermittently from the woodlands beyond. They reached the
tumbledown, overgrown sheds at the edge of the property and crouched down, watching the trees. The softly
billowing mists created brief shapes occasionally that made them tense up, but it was just mist.
“You took the circuit, didn’t you?” Gutes said at length.
“What?” Larkin’s tone was short. His skull felt like it was splitting from the blow Cuu had given it, and he could
taste one of his migraines creeping in.
“The circuit from Rerval’s vox. You took it, didn’t you? I’ve seen the way you mess with tech-kit. You’re the only
person apart from Rerval who’s got the skills.”
“Piet, considering how dumb you like to play, you’re a smart man.”
Gutes grinned. He scanned the woods again.
“Why’d you do it, Larks?” he said after a pause.
“I…” Larkin hesitated. “I wanted to make sure we were left alone for a while.”
“Oh,” said Gutes.
“Then, I think maybe we need that vox again now. I think maybe we’ve been alone long enough.”
“Yeah,” said Larkin.
“You’ll give it back?”
“Yeah.”
“I won’t say nothing, Larks.”
“Thanks, Piet.”
An hour passed, slow and taut. It began to rain, lightly at first and then with greater force. Despite the rain, the mist
refused to budge. The light ebbed as it became overcast, and the early morning seemed like wet twilight.
There was no signal on the beads. Caffran began to wonder if he’d imagined it.
All fully kitted and prepped, the members of the detail took station to cover the back of the manse. Caffran was set
up in the greenhouse, one of the western most outhouses running off the back yard, with a good angle across the rear
lawn, and a decent view left into the patch of kitchen garden behind the pantry. He and Rerval had strengthened the
defences in the greenhouse with packing crates, earth-filled sacking and part of an old iron bedstead they’d found on
a bonfire heap. They’d carefully knocked out the last of the glass panels.
East of him, across the mouth of the yard area, Cuu was crouching in place at the end of a long barricade Muril
and Larkin had built from fence timbers and corrugated iron sheets. They’d had to dismantle several of the lean-tos
to cannibalize for material.
Rerval was positioned further along the same barricade, hunched in the corner it made with the stone wall of the
old coal bunker.
Brostin was sitting on a chair just inside the half-open kitchen door, his flamer broom across his lap, his tanks
beside him. He checked the power cells of the two laspistols — his and Feygof’s —that he carried as small-arms.
Feygor, his rifle primed, was a few metres away at the main kitchen window. A thick wall separated him from Gutes,
who was in the dining room, dug-in at the rear window overlooking the coal house and the hedges of the side ditch.
Larkin was on station on the first floor above them all, using a bedroom window as his fire point.
Muril, insisting she was the closest thing they had to a scout, was up at the top of the rear lawn in the derelict
sheds at the end of the garden wall. She knelt, perfectly still, watching the trees.
About twenty minutes earlier, as they’d ran final checks before taking up station, Rerval had found the missing
trans-mission circuit on the kitchen table. Assuming that it was Feygor, or one of Feygor’s cronies, who’d left it there
for him to find, Rerval made little fuss. They were all in this together now and there was no point racking up the
tension any more.
He’d fitted it back into the caster and, after consulting with Feygor, sent a message back to Ins Arbor. Position,
situation, the prospect of enemy contact.
Ironically, there had been no reply, apart from a few strangulated whines of static. Rerval didn’t know if it was
atmospherics or some slip-up he’d made repairing the vox. There was no time to strip it out and start again. He
prayed company command had heard him. He prayed there’d be help coming. Failing help, he hoped that a warning
had got through.
In the damp, mouldering back bedroom, Larkin settled himself on the pungent mattress he’d pulled up to lie on, and
rested his long-las on the paint-flaked sill. He shook out his neck, tried to ignore the pain clawing into his brain from
the top of the spine and across the back of his head, and scoped up.
His swollen face ached as he pushed it against the eyepiece. His cracked rib stung and he had to alter his stance.
He had a good sweep of the entire back lawn. He panned the rifle around, taking distance readings off the various
features: the end sheds, the sundial at the centre of the lawn, the coal bunker, Caff’s greenhouse.
Down below him, in the yard, he saw Cuu crouching at the barricade with his back to him.
Larkin turned the rifle down and took aim on Cuu. No more than fifteen metres. Clear. An easy shot. Target-fix.
Larkin’s fingers twitched on the trigger.
Not yet. But maybe soon. If there was shooting, if there was a fight, he’d take Cuu and damn the consequences.
He’d take Cuu Cuu’s way: in battle, when no one would know. What was it that little bastard had said? War’s a
messy thing, Tanith. Confused and all shit like that. Middle of combat, all crap flying this way and that. Who’s gonna
notice if I get my payback? You’d just be another body in the count. Good advice, Lijah Cuu. Good advice.
Rainwater dripped from the shed roof and hit Muril’s cheek with a plick. She wiped it away, and then realised it
wasn’t the drip that had made the noise.
Her micro-bead had tapped.
“Who goes there?” she said into the mic.
Silence.
She waited. Something moved in the trees, but it seemed likely it was just a bird.
She was about to ask if any of the Ghosts at the house had signalled when a figure tore out of the trees, running
towards her position, leaping fallen logs and ripping through undergrowth. Her rifle came up and she had a clear
shot.
She froze.
It was Jajjo. Filthy, covered in mud, his uniform ripped, Jajjo was running almost blindly towards her.
“Jajjo!” She called. He skidded to a halt, looking around.
“The wall, man, the wall! Get in here!”
He started forward again and vaulted the low stone wall, then came crawling round on his hands and knees into
her shed.
“M-Muril?”
“Gak! Look at you. What happened?”
“En-enemy p-patrol,” Jajjo stammered, so exhausted and out of breath he could barely speak.
“I’ve got Jajjo here,” Muril voxed to the manse. “Stand by.”
She dragged Jajjo over against the shed wall. He was in a bad way, thin, pale and dehydrated.
“Report!” she hissed.
“W-where’s Ven?” he asked.
She shrugged. “Haven’t seen him.”
“He should be here already! He was ahead of me!”
“Slow down! Slow down! Tell me about your contact. What did you find out there?”
“Shit, Muril,” he said, and clambered over the window slit. He peered out. Twenty, maybe thirty of them. They’re
right behind me.
“Didn’t you get my call?”
“Just the signal. Comeuppance.”
“Gak, I knew the link was bad! I-He shut up and ducked down. They’re here!” he hissed.
She wasn’t about to cower with him. She got up to the shed’s window and looked out.
Figures, three or four of them, were approaching through the mist and the trees. Big men, in battledress.
Carrying lasrifles.
She recognized their blood-red tunics and their leering iron face masks at once. Not Shadik. Not Shadik at all.
Blood Pact.
As if they had smelled her sudden fear, three of the Chaos infantry swung round and opened fire on the outhouses.
Laser rounds chopped into the roof tiles and shattered old brick and chafstone. Support fire — three or four more
lasrifles and then what felt like an autocannon — whickered out of the trees.
Muril yelped and covered Jajjo’s head with her arms as las-rounds punched in through the woodwork of the
window and tore apart the leading edge of the roof.
“Contact!” she yelled into her bead. “Contact!”
“Golden Throne!” said Feygor, peering out of the window. “That’s las-fire! Eight, maybe nine shooters.”
Brostin was on his feet. He took a glance round at Peterik, who was shielding the old woman in the corner of the
pantry.
“Shadik don’t have las weapons,” he said, in gruff confusion. “Murt? How come they have las weapons?”
“I don’t know!” snapped Feygor. “Muril! Muril! Report!”
The bead-link crackled, “—od Pact! I say again, contact is Blood Pact!”
“Oh, sacred feth!” Feygor said.
Caffran heard the signal too and his blood ran cold. They’d met the Blood Part before, on Phantine. The Part was the
devoted vanguard of the arch-enemy. Not cultists, not rebels. Drilled and trained infantry, highly motivated, highly
skilled and well equipped. If they were here, fighting for the Republic… well, that meant a forty year old war had
just changed as radically as it had done when the Guard arrived in support of the Alliance. This had ceased to be a
global matter. Now it was well and truly part of the Crusade.
From his position, all he could see was the back of the outhouse and the sprays of tile and stone smashing off it
under the heavy fire. He yearned for a target.
“Keep it close! Wait until they commit!” Feygor urged over the link. The hell with that! Muril and Jajjo were dead
meat if no one took up the fight. Feygor clearly didn’t want to give away the fact that a unit was dug-in here. Not until
he had to.
A slightly different noise now rose from the beleaguered outhouse. The whine-crack, higher-pitched, of first one
Imperial lasrifle, then another. Muril and Jajjo were returning fire.
That was play, as far as Caffran was concerned.
“Larkin!” he voxed. “You got a target?”
“Yes, Caff. At least two.”
“I’ve got an angle on one too,” reported Gutes.
“I think it’s time for us to go to work,” Caffran said.
“Hold fire!” Feygor snarled over the link. “They don’t know we’re here yet! Hold fire!”
“Feth that,” said Larkin and took his first shot.
The overcharged sniper-round zapped off up the length of the garden and blew out the head of one Blood Part
trooper in a sideways spray of blood, tissue and metal. His almost headless body toppled over into the ferns. The
others started running for cover. From the dining room, Gutes took one out with hits to the hip and the side of the
neck.
“Holy Feth!” Feygor was screaming. “I didn’t give the fire order! Who’s firing? Who the feth is firing?”
“I am,” said Larkin and did it again. Target-fix. Seventy-three metres.
Another head shot. The Blood Part trooper flew off his feet, his legs kicking slackly up into the air as he
cartwheeled.
“I think we’re in this now,” said Rerval and started to clip las-shots up over the lawn.
“Sure as sure,” agreed Cuu, opening fire alongside him.
“Holy Feth! Won’t any of you take a fething order?” Feygor shouted over the vox, almost apoplectic.
In the perimeter outhouse, Muril and Jajjo were blasting away and rejoiced as first one Pacter dropped, then two
more thanks to fire from the house. Muril recognised and admired the work of a long-las.
She tracked another one into the trees as he sought cover, and sprayed the area on full auto, kicking up a fuss of
torn leaves and stalks.
Jajjo was firing on single shot. His gun followed a Blood Pact trooper who was dashing back into the misty
shadows of the pines. Jajjo squeezed the trigger.
The dazzling round hit the figure in the spine and tumbled him over.
Autocannon fire continued to strafe the sheds where Jajjo and Muril hid. After a couple more fierce bursts, the
side wall came down in a tumble of dislodged chafstone, and the two Ghosts had to crawl out from under the
slumped roof and move in a rapid crouch back along the garden wall.
“Can’t someone tag that fething cannon?” Muril barked.
“Negative, can’t see it,” Caffran voxed, his opinion swiftly agreed with by Gutes.
“Larks? You see it?” Muril called.
“Too deep in the woods,” Larkin replied. “Can’t even see a snout flash.”
“Gak that!” said Muril. She and Jajjo were pinned down behind the narrow stone wall, and cannon fire was
gradually creeping their way. They needed a break, enough time to run back down the lawn to the main house.
It didn’t look like they were going to get it.
“Hold tight and wait for my word,” said Larkin over the link. “Wait for it…”
He couldn’t see the cannon crew, even from his raised vantage, and he couldn’t see any muzzle flash. But he
watched the dipping line of the cannon’s tracer rounds as they tore out of the woodland. The high calibre shots
punished the garden wall and made sappy steam out of the undergrowth.
Another few seconds and it would be punching through the wall where Muril and Jajjo were sheltering.
Larkin rolled his aim back, following the line of tracers until it vanished at its mysterious source. He made an
educated adjustment to his aim, and fired into the woods.
The cannon fire stopped abruptly.
“Go! Muril! Go!” he cried, as he reloaded and fired another shot exactly where he’d placed the first.
Muril and Jajjo fled down the garden towards the barricade. A few loose las-rounds from rifles chased them,
chewing up the turf.
The cannon started up again, but it was lacking confidence now, as if someone else had taken over. Its shots
bombarded the back wall of the garden or shot clear over it, smacking into the rear face of the house. A window
smashed.
By then, Muril and Jajjo had reached the barricade and had hurled themselves over it.
The cannon continued to spray.
“First thing you learn,” Larkin said to himself, “is move if someone knows where you are.”
He fired another shot, aiming exactly at the point he’d placed the last two. For the second time in thirty seconds,
the cannon fell suddenly silent.
“Nice bit of shooting that, Larks,” voxed Gutes.
Now Caffran felt exposed. With Muril and Jajjo dropping back, he now occupied point position in the defence.
He kept scanning the end of the garden, the wall, the chokes of undergrowth leading into the trees.
He didn’t have to wait long.
At least two dozen Blood Pact troopers came out of the tree-line and assaulted the rear wall, sheeting fire at the
manse. All of the Ghosts, even Larkin, had to drop down to avoid the ferocity. The attackers were now using the rear
garden wall and the mined sheds abandoned by Muril and Jajjo as cover.
Caffran was the first to begin return fire. He lanced shots along the back of the wall that hit at least one attacker
and caused several more to duck. This interruption in firing gave Cuu and Larkin an opening. Cuu sprayed the back
of the outhouses with fire, and Larkin fired another hot-shot that took a Blood Pact trooper in the chest.
To the east, from the dining room window, Gutes took up the slack, firing his trademark way: slow, methodical,
jaggedly. Two Blood Pact troopers tried to flank by sprinting down the side wall of the property, following the
hedges into the ditch. Gutes got them both. Then a third that he didn’t kill outright. Then a fourth who emerged, trying
to drag the injured man back into cover.
As an afterthought, Gutes picked off the wounded bastard too.
A flurry of fire was hitting down at the manse and the barricade from the central portion of the rear wall. Cuu and
Rerval replied, supplemented by Jajjo and Muril, who were now up the barricade with them. Feygor added his own
support from the kitchen window, and Brostin suddenly broke from the kitchen doorway and ran up the yard to the
side of Caffran’s station, leaving his flamer behind. The big thug wriggled in beside Caffran and started to fire his
pistols, one in each meaty hand.
“What I wouldn’t give for a tread-fether right now,” Brostin grumbled. “I hear that!” said Caffran.
A shot spat across them from the left. Blood Pacters moving west to flank them from the other side. Brostin rolled
to his feet and slid out of Caffran’s greenhouse, swung round behind it and came up over the low wall to meet the
three Pacters rushing them across the kitchen garden. His laspistols chattered as he raked them back and forth. He
killed two and winged a third.
Down at the barricade, Cuu deselected rapid fire and switched his Mark III to single shot. He hunted the garden
wall, waiting for Blood Pacters to pop up for a shot. Every time they did, he shot them in the face. Three in a row.
Four. The fifth one was smacked over by one of Larkin’s shots before Cuu could fire.
Ducking round the kitchen doorway for cover, Feygor dared the yard and ran for the barricade as a welter of shots
rained down, exploding plaster, brick, gutters, tiles.
He ducked in beside Muril.
“Get up with Larkin!” he said. “I know you don’t have a long-las anymore, but you’ll do more good up there.”
She nodded and ran back for the kitchen door Feygor got up and started firing. He looked over at Jajjo. “Where’s
Ven?” Jajjo shook his head.
Beside Jajjo, Rerval fired and scored a killshot. He distinctly saw the Blood Pact trooper fall.
He turned to grin triumphantly at Feygor and a las-round hit the side of his head.
Jajjo ducked down to help him, but Rerval was getting up without assistance. “I’m okay,” he said, but it didn’t
sound like that. From the corner of his mouth back to his jaw-line, his cheek was flopped open and blood was
streaming out down his neck. Rerval fired one more shot, then reached up and felt the rip in his face.
“Feth—” he slurred and fell over.
Jajjo dragged him back into the kitchen. The amount of blood pouring out of Rerval’s torn face was extraordinary.
“Help me!” Jajjo shouted to the old woman and the young boy he saw cowering in the corner He had no idea who
they were.
Las-fire smacked and punched through the kitchen window and covered the tiles with glass shards. Several more
shots exploded fibres from the kitchen door Jajjo tried to hold Rerval’s face together.
The old woman ran across the kitchen, her head down, and took over. She pinched the wound tight and started to
wrap it with her shawl.
“Let me free! Let me free, for god’s sake! I can help!” bellowed the young man. Jajjo realised the youth was tied
to his chair Jajjo got up, went across to the boy, and cut his bonds with his dagger. “I don’t know why you’re tied
up,” he said, “but don’t gak with me.”
The young man — Jajjo realised how dirty and unshaven he was — darted across to the field dressing kit Gutes
had left on the bench seat. He recovered it and ran over to join the old woman cradling Rerval. An astonishingly
wide pool of blood had spread out under her.
“Do you know what you’re doing?” Jajjo asked.
“I was a corpsman. I know field aid,” replied the boy.
“Don’t let him bleed out,” said Jajjo, and ran out into the fight again.
Las-fire flickered up and down the lawn, fierce and heavy. Caffran thought he’d scored another hit but it was hard to
tell. There were at least a dozen shooters up there.
Muril arrived on the first floor, and tried to find the window with the best sweep.
She could hear the hot-shot whine of Larkin’s weapon from nearby.
Larkin reloaded again and took aim. He’d switched bedrooms three rimes since the fight had begun so his shots
didn’t come from the same place each time. In the far end bedroom, he knelt and sighted.
A steel helmet over a grotesque iron mask.
Bang!
The Blood Pact trooper fell. Larkin reloaded.
He hunted for targets. The back of his skull hurt worse than ever, and he could taste blood.
Every now and then, his vision faltered. The blizzard of las-fire coming down at them was almost overwhelming.
Middle of combat, all crap flying this way and that…
Larkin stroked his long-las and tilted the aim down. Lijah Cuu was below him in the yard, firing away up hill.
The scope’s crosshairs made a luminous frame around the back of Cuu’s head.
Larkin paused. He breathed carefully. His head was really aching now, that terrible stabbing migraine that had
haunted him all his life.
He blinked away sweat. He would fething do this.
Cuu, right in his sights. Lijah Cuu. His nemesis. The embodiment of his fear. The man who had killed Try Again
Bragg.
One shot.
Pop.
Easy.
Larkin’s finger tightened on the trigger. Target-fix. Cuu. Nine point seven metres. Larkin whined aloud, a pitiful
sound. He wanted to do it, yet he couldn’t. He was a sniper, a marksman, a killer. But not a murderer. He couldn’t
shoot one of their own in the back, even if it was Lijah fething Cuu.
He wanted to. He had to. It was the only way. It was why he’d come.
But…
Cuu would have done it without hesitation, Larkin thought. That thought and that thought alone convinced him to
take his finger off the trigger.
“Larks! What the gak are you doing?”
Larkin looked up from his carefully laid gun. Muril stood behind him, appalled.
“Don’t do it,” she said. “Please. I know you want to. I know he deserves it. But don’t…”
“Sehra,” he said quietly. “I can’t anyway.”
“That’s good,” she said. “Really, Larks. Don’t descend to that animal’s level.”
“Oh, feth,” sighed Larkin. His head was truly spinning now. His vision was closing in with flashes and lumps of
colour. She was right. He was so fething glad he hadn’t stained his soul the way Cuu had stained his. There was
honour. There was morality. There was sleeping at night without waking up screaming. Bragg would understand.
Wherever he was, Bragg would understand.
Larkin turned and took a last look out of his scope. Cuu was looking right back at them.
Lijah Cuu saw the aimed rifle.
And smiled.
Brostin and Caffran finally drove the last of the Pacters back from the left hand flank of the house. Feygor and Gutes
smacked shots against the rear wall, and Feygor hit another body.
Then the Blood Pact fell silent.
The Ghosts waited. No contact. No sound. The rain got heavier and washed the traces of Rerval’s blood out of the
yard.
“Stand down,” said Feygor, at last. “They’ll be back,” said Caffran.
“Lie down,” Muril advised him.
“My head really hurts.”
“Cuu smacked you a good one with that skillet, Larks. I’ve been worried.”
Larkin lay back on the dirty mattress in the upstairs room. “It’s not that. I get headaches. Really bad ones. I’ve
always had them.”
“Whatever,” said Muril. “I think it’s that headwound. Cuu really hurt you. I don’t want to worry you, Hlaine, but it
needs to be looked at. I wish for gak’s sake Curth or Dorden was here.”
Larkin had already passed out on the mattress. Watery blood wept into the padding behind his head.
“Gak,” said Muril. “You really need a doc fast…”
She froze. Down below, she could hear Feygor and the others repairing defences and reloading for the next wave.
She’d heard a sound from the front of the house.
She took up her lasgun and went out onto the landing. Another tiny sound, a movement at the porch.
She went down the staircase slowly, gun raised.
At the foot of the stairs, she wheeled round, and found herself aiming at Cuu. He winked at her.
“Careful, girl.”
“What are you doing here?”
“I heard something out the front,” he said. She covered him with her weapon. “Check it out,”
she said.
“Why the hostility?” he asked.
“You know why, you bastard. Now… check it out.” Cuu went down to the front door, Muril watching him every
centimetre of the way. He drew his blade. Cuu threw open the door.
The dagger flew from his hand as a tall figure took him in a choke hold.
“Do you realise how easy it was to get round the front of this place?” asked Mkvenner.
FIFTEEN
THE MONSTERS
“In the long run, a man with a brain is more dangerous than a man with brawn.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, from A Treatise on the Nature of Warfare
Firebreathing, like the giant creatures of old myth, the monsters lay before them.
When the monsters roared, the ground shook and the air came past hot and acrid, in a pressurised Shockwave. The
light flashes were painful and immense, like grounded stars being switched on and off in the night. The sound shook
teeth and bone and marrow.
The battle in the ammunition corridor had taken seven minutes to conclude in the Ghosts’ favour. Squaring off
against a Shadik battalion of slightly greater size, Gaunt’s infiltration group had lost five men — four Ghosts and one
of Golke’s Bande Sezari troopers. But their superior weaponry and, in Gaunt’s opinion, far superior battlecraft had
left nearly thirty Shadik troopers dead. Broken, the rest had fallen back.
Undoubtedly, the Shadik commanders knew they had intruders now. Despite the open invitation to the siege guns’
location offered by the corridor, Gaunt and Mkoll had pulled the mission team off east into a muddy, trackless
wasteland beyond.
The area was lightless and cold, rambling with old lines of wire and jumbles of wreckage. Weeds and thorny
scrub grew in dumps and thickets, sprouting around the split rockcrete of old pill boxes and between the axles of
rusted trucks. This was an old battlefield, years old, that the war had passed over and left behind. Now it was just
dead ground in the hinterland of the Republican line.
The Ghosts advanced silently through the dark terrain, heading north, towards the titanic blasts of the guns. They
kept the ammunition corridor just in sight to their left, and moved parallel to its course.
There would be troops out searching for them. Gaunt was sure of that. Even with the huge offensive going on,
drawing on Shadik manpower, the enemy commanders would not allow a suspected infiltration so close to their
super-guns to go unchecked.
On three occasions, the Ghosts dropped down into cover when the scouts alerted them to Shadik patrols in the
corridor. Gaunt didn’t need another stand-up fight at this stage. Better to hide and wait and move on once the
jeopardy had passed.
The night sky was amber, tinged by the vast doughnut of smoke drifting out from the guns. On occasions, they
glimpsed the moon, an orange semi-circle dancing in and out of the bars of cloudy exhaust.
Nearly three hours after they had first emerged from the mill tunnel, they came up to a ridge that overlooked the
guns.
The monsters.
It was physically hard to observe them directly. For the last forty minutes the Imperials had been trudging through
a wasteland made spectral by the almighty flashes going off beyond the black horizon. They had almost become
acclimatised to the noise and the light and the trembling soil.
But looking on the guns was virtually impossible. The flashes seared eyesight, leaving idiot repeats glowing on
the back of the eyelids. The Shockwaves came like slaps. The discharge blasts felt like they were exploding
eardrums. Beltayn reported that the pulse shock had killed all vox-links.
Lying on his side on the earth near the top of the ridge, with the men spread out below him, Gaunt pondered his
next move. He felt frustration gnawing at him. They’d got so close, against all expectations except his own, and now
they couldn’t go the last distance.
It was like one of the myths he’d read as a child in the scholam progenium. Monsters so ghastly that the very
breath or sight of them blinded men and turned them to stone.
He adjusted his data-slate and took a compass bearing. At least now he had accomplished something. The precise
location of the siege guns was known to them. Without other options to hand, their imperative now was to get that
information back to GSC. And that meant physically, with the vox dead.
Gaunt turned to Mkoll and the sergeants and used Verghast scratch-company sign language to communicate his
intention to pull back and break out. Halfway through, a chillingly eerie thing happened. Darkness and silence fell.
It wasn’t complete silence. The distant, frenzied commotion of the offensive was now audible, and it wasn’t true
darkness either because of the ambient background firelight.
But the guns had stopped firing.
Gaunt crawled back to the top of the ridge. What he had only vaguely glimpsed before was now laid out below
him. The monster guns, each one set on a huge rail cart, their massive barrels, the size of manufactory chimneys,
elevated to the sky. There were seven of them, just like Bonin had insisted. Smoke lay thick like ground fog around
them, blurring their shapes and distorting the bare white glow of the chemical lanterns strung up around the area.
Gaunt saw figures moving around, gun-crew dwarfed by the huge railway cannons. Electric hoists and flatbed
loading carts, which had been occupied serving shells into the automatic arming mechanisms, were now busy
clearing unused shells and propellant-mix cartridges clear of the firing site. Some laden carts were being attached to
a greasy shunting engine that began puffing them away down the ammunition corridor.
“Why d’you think they’ve stopped?” whispered Golke.
“They’ve been firing all night,” Gaunt replied. “I imagine there comes a point when the barrels get so hot, you
have to let them cool. God-Emperor! Now we’ve found them, what do we do?”
Golke shrugged. Even dormant, the massive guns and their riveted steel cars looked invincible. Oil and
condensation dripped from their huge shock-absorber pylons and clung in glittering droplets to the taut wires of the
warping winches. The shells alone were taller than a man.
The Ghosts had proved their bravery, tenacity and ability to Golke without doubt, but what could they, with
lasrifles or even tube-charges, do against such juggernauts?
“I don’t think there’s much chance of us spiking them,” Mkoll said to Gaunt, as if reading Golke’s thoughts. “I
reckon I could feth up a field gun or a howitzer fairly permanently, but I wouldn’t know where to begin with one of
these. Let alone seven.”
“What about the munitions?” Domor suggested.
Gaunt thought about it. None of them were demolitions experts. Domor’s landmine skills were as close as that got.
Although a big explosion was the basic result he was looking for, he didn’t want to go fiddling around with the shells
or the cartridges.
They didn’t even know what mixes and forces the Shadik were using, or what type of explosives or propellants.
They might get a big explosion all right but one that incinerated them and left the guns standing. Besides, the Shadik
were shipping the spare munitions away even as they watched. They knew the risks.
“I think we have to cut our losses,” said Gaunt. “Getting these co-ordinates back to the GSC is going to be a job in
itself, and I think we’re going to have to settle for being content with that.”
“If we can’t screw with the guns themselves,” said Dorden suddenly, “why don’t we screw up their use?”
“What, doctor?”
“Their mobility. They’re too big for us to deal with, so we use their size against them. You fancy moving one of
those without rails?”
Gaunt chuckled to himself. Obvious, elegant, simple. The Republic had constructed a major system of wide-gauge
tracks along their front line, connected with service lines, sidings and ammunition corridors, so that the siege guns
could be shunted from one firing position to the next. At locations like the one they overlooked, the double line
fanned out into reinforced spurs so that the guns could sit alongside each other. But that main double line was their
only way of moving.
“What are we carrying in the way of tube-charges?” Gaunt asked Mkoll.
“Enough to blow the main line here and on the far side for a good distance.”
“They’ll repair them,” said Golke.
“Of course, but how long will that take, sir?” asked Gaunt. “A day? Two days? Besides, struggling back with this
location setting will be a pointless effort if by the time we’ve got an airstrike or an armour push lined up the guns
have been moved again. I don’t think we’ve got a choice, realistically. We have to blow the line. If we take out the
ammo corridor too, they won’t even be able to fire the guns let alone shift them until the repairs are done.”
Golke nodded. “How do we do this?” he asked.
They broke into four groups roughly along platoon lines. Mkoll’s unit would move up, skirting the firing site, and
wire the track sections north of the guns. Gaunt allowed him ten minutes’ head start to get into position. Domor’s
squad went east, to rig the ammunition corridor’s line. Arcuda’s dropped back west and right of the ridge to set their
charges along the southern stretch. Gaunt stayed with Criid’s platoon and the elements of Raglon’s on the ridge,
ready to provide fire support if things woke up.
Ideally, the blasts should happen pretty much simultaneously. Co-ordination was hard without the vox. Gaunt had
them synchronise their timepieces. The deadline was at 04.00 hours. Charges should be laid by then. At 04.00, each
team leader would fire a red starshell to signal readiness, then Gaunt would fire a white shell to order detonation. If
any reds hadn’t fired by that time, then Gaunt would wait two minutes. After that, it was white flare anyway and pull
out. They agreed a rendezvous back in the deadlands.
“Remember,” Gaunt told them, “if it comes to a choice between sticking to the deadline and blowing the tracks,
blow the tracks. We can always improvise if we have to. The Emperor protects, so serve him well.”
It was two minutes to four. The sounds of battle were still rolling in from the front line. The cover team left on the
ridge waited nervously. They felt vulnerable and alone now there were so few of them.
Beltayn snapped a white signal pellet into his flare pistol and handed it to Gaunt. “Safety’s off, sir,” he said.
“Problem!” Criid hissed urgently. Gaunt looked where she was pointing. A detachment of Shadik troopers was
filing out into the siege gun firing area from a trench head to their west. Gaunt counted at least sixty men. Clad in long
coats and helmets, their weapons ready and lowered in their hands, they were searching between the gun cars and the
loading hoists.
Looking for us. Gaunt thought. Looking for the infiltrators.
“Ready your weapons,” he called down the line. “Wait for my word.”
Some of the Shadik had lanterns. Two had teams of snarling canines.
Gaunt tucked the flare pistol into his pocket and took out his boltgun. Full clip. He drew his power sword and laid
it on the earth beside him.
Down the line, the Ghosts in Criid and Raglon’s squads fitted new clips to their Mark III’s and fixed their blades
to the barrels, each trooper stabbing the warknife into the ridge soil first to dull its shine.
Golke and the Bande Sezari soldiers got their solid-round weapons ready.
One more minute.
Be on time, all of you, Gaunt willed. Be on time.
Alarm whistles suddenly blew. The enemy detachment abruptly began running, moving in a flood to the east. Gaunt
saw muzzle flashes and heard the crack of rifles.
They were heading into the ammunition corridor. Domor’s team had been spotted.
“On them!” Gaunt yelled. “First-and-Only!” The cover team broke from the ridge and came down the slope, guns
blazing. The Shadik unit faltered, suddenly under fire from their left. The Ghosts ripped into them.
Gaunt was right in the middle of it. His boltgun howled and blew an enemy infantryman apart. His majestic blade,
the power sword of Heironymo Sondar, gifted to him in gratitude by the people of Vervunhive, flickered with blue
lightning. Beside him, Beltayn was firing from the shoulder as he ran, thumping bright las-bolts into the greatcoated
enemy.
Beyond Beltayn, Criid was urging her Ghosts on, deploying them in right groups even in the melee of an
impromptu charge.
I made a good choice in Tona, Gaunt thought.
A second later, a Shadik battlettooper was in his face, lunging with a serrated bayonet. Gaunt deflected with the
sword, shearing off the front half of the man’s gun and an arm with it. A bolt-round settled the man right behind him.
Lubba’s flamer roared and lit up the night. Gaunt saw two Shadik lurching away, burning from head to toe. Hwlan,
Vulli and Kolea laid in side by side. Kolea seemed to have forgotten how a lasrifle worked. He was scything into the
enemy with his bayonet fixed, reaping them down like com stalks, hacking like a miner at an ore-face.
It was a blur of frantic, face-to-face killing. Golke blasted with his revolver until it was empty, and then grabbed
up a Shadik submachine-gun that had fallen on the gravel of the track bed.
One of the Bande Sezari men beside him convulsed as rifle rounds tore through him. Golke swung round and
cracked away with the compact weapon, knocking three of the enemy troopers off their feet.
“More of them!” Raglon yelled above the din of combat. Gaunt could see another company of Shadik troopers
streaming out of the eastern trench-head to reinforce the first. Grenades blared and flashed in the night.
Domor’s squad had been pinned down and then driven off by the first fusillades. They had taken cover around a
parked munitions truck about two hundred metres down the corridor.
“Sir!” Beltayn yelled. Gaunt looked up and saw two red starshells fading away. In the frenzy of it all, he’d almost
missed the signals from Mkoll and Arcuda.
Two out of three. Good enough. It would have to do.
“Break off and retreat!” he bellowed, and fired the white flare.
As soon as the corpse light of the white signal bloomed above them, a hot yellow burst exploded to the north, and
then another, seconds later, to the west.
The cover team, firing behind them as they went, battled up the ridge and back into the darkness of the wasteland.
They left the sidings and track beds littered with Shadik dead.
Gaunt checked his bearings by the luminous dial of his compass. They were right on the rendezvous point. “Head
count!” he ordered to Beltayn.
Behind them, yellow light flickered the night. The main line was severed both north and south of the gun sidings.
Two minutes passed, and Arcuda’s team emerged out of the gloom. Then Domor’s squad struggled in, breathlessly.
“I’m sorry, sir,” Domor panted. “We were almost set when they hit us. I tried to go back and finish the job, but they
had the area bracketed.”
“Don’t worry, Domor. You did your best. We hit the main transit line, that’s the important thing. Those guns aren’t
going anywhere.”
“But they’ll still be able to fire with the corridor open to supply them.” Domor looked forlorn with
disappointment.
Gaunt gripped him by the shoulders. “You did all right, Shoggy. Really. You did your best, that’s all I ever ask for.
We sit tight here now until Mkoll’s mob rejoins us and then we have fun and games getting out of here. All right?”
Domor nodded.
Beltayn reappeared. “We left a few dead behind us, sir, but everyone’s accounted for. Except—”
“Except?”
“Count Golke, sir.”
Shadik troopers were milling around the firing site, and spreading out down the lines, surveying the damage with
lanterns. Two huge craters marred the tracks, one on each side of the siege gun emplacement. More troopers, muffled
in their heavy, drab coats and trench armour, shambled south down the corridor line, picking over the bodies. One
called for an officer as he found the half-laid tube-charges between the sleepers.
Count Golke crouched behind the bogies of the munition cart, barely twenty metres from the nearest enemy soldier.
He watched as they grouped around and cut apart the wires connecting the tube-bombs, pulling them off the tracks.
The officer waved a hand and barked orders, sending a squad of about ten down to check the cart.
The troopers approached, rifles ready, the lamplight glinting off their helmets and bayonets.
Golke limped round the back end of the cart. It was actually a linked line of three, laden with propellant
cartridges, waiting for the next shunting engine to move in and pull it down to the armoured magazines.
Golke climbed up onto the middle cart. It was hard work with his hip. He winced and grunted.
The bullet wound in his chest made it harder still.
He got onto the top, and sat down between the canister hoppers. He smiled. He’d come back into the Pocket, faced
his demons, and come through it. Now he was going to his victory too. It was due him.
What he’d failed to achieve as a commander, he would do as a trooper.
The enemy soldiers were around the carts now. He could hear their voices. One called out. He’d found the trail of
Golke’s blood.
Golke heard more voices, and boots clunking on rungs of the cart’s metal side ladder.
Those Shadik voices. The voices of the enemy.
Golke wished the whole war could have been as simple as this.
He coughed, and blood welled out of his mouth and down his chin. A Shadik called out, he’d heard the cough.
Golke caught the sound of bolt-actions cranking.
He lifted up the tube-charge. It was the only one he’d been able to tear free from the tangle Domor’s team had
wired to the tracks. There’d been no time for more.
He wasn’t sure how it worked, but there was a paper tab on the top that looked like an igniter strip.
He felt footsteps on the body of the track. A Shadik trooper appeared around the side of the right hand hopper and
called out as he saw Golke lying there.
The trooper raised his rifle.
“For the Emperor,” Golke said, and tore the det-tape away.
The tube fired. Canisters around ruptured. Propellant cartridges ignited. The blast lit up the valley for a moment. One
hundred metres of ammunition corridor and the land around it vanished in a geyser of flame.
SIXTEEN
COMEUPPANCE
“I hate last stands. You never get an opportunity to practise for them.”
—Piet Gutes
The sky was full of stars. They were pink, and vaguely oblong. On the horizon, sheaves of white fireworks danced
and burst, like the firecrackers of a victory parade. The air was pulsing with a strange humming sound, like a
moaning human voice swimming in and out of hearing. A dark shadow suddenly eclipsed the stars. A big shadow that
filled the sky. “Wake up,” said a voice.
He obeyed, moving. The strange sky, with its ghastly, wrong stars, drained away. He smelled cold air and heard
the patter of heavy rain close by.
“Larks,” said Bragg, “it’s time to wake up.”
“Try?”
Try Again Bragg smiled his big, genial smile. “Time to wake up,” he said.
Larkin blinked and sat up quickly. The movement made him dizzy and he felt nausea rise through him. The hind
part of his brain felt like someone was repeatedly clubbing it with a nine-seventy, spike first. At the edges of his
vision, obscure lights danced and fire crackers burst.
He was on the dirty mattress in a damp bedroom of the Manse. Rain sheeted down outside, accompanied by
lightning. It was late afternoon.
Bragg wasn’t there anymore.
“See you later,” said Larkin.
Apart from the rainstorm, things had been quiet since they’d driven the assault back first thing. They’d repaired the
defences, and added a few more at Mkvenner’s suggestion.
The scout explained how he and Jajjo had run across the Blood Pact unit late the previous night. A fair-sized
patrol force, which Mkvenner was certain was just the spearhead of a larger advance. Shadik had been reinforced
from off-world by the elite infantry of the arch-enemy, and the first action of that elite had been to pave the way for
an invasion through the Montorq Forest.
Ironic, Caffran thought, that both Chaos and Imperial elements had brought the same advice to the warring nations
of Aexe Cardinal.
Rerval was stable, thanks to the deserter’s field aid, though weak from loss of blood. They put him in the drawing
room out of the way, and Caffran asked Peterik to look after him. No one complained that Peterik wasn’t tied up
anymore. The old woman sat with them and banked up the drawing room fire.
With Rerval out of commission, Mkvenner operated the vox-caster, and sent a more detailed repeat of the original
message. Again, there was no reply. There was still no way of telling if anyone had heard either warning.
“We’re done here now, anyway,” announced Feygor. “I mean, now Ven and Jajjo are back. We know the situation.
So we can get out of here now. Just get up and go.”
“And how far would we get?” asked Mkvenner. “With an old lady and a man who can’t walk?”
Feygor shrugged. “Then we fething well leave them! I know, tough. I don’t like it. But aren’t we obliged to carry a
warning back now? I mean, the vox is probably down. We’d be failing in our duty if we didn’t get off our arses and
try to get word back to company command.”
Mkvenner frowned. He didn’t want to get into his thoughts on the subject of Murtan Feygor and failure of duty.
“He’s right,” he said instead, surprising them all, including Feygor. “Up to a point, anyway. We have to assume the
vox is dead. We have to get a warning through to Ins Arbor, or this could turn into a first class feth-up. But even
without the old lady and Rerval, even moving as fast as we can, I don’t think we’d outrun them. They’re swift,
they’re good and they’re right on us.”
“So?” asked Cuu.
“So, we maintain the defence of this place. For as long as we can. We keep the Blood Pact busy right here.”
“Because?”
“Because we’ll be buying time for someone to get word back. Someone fast might have a chance if the enemy push
was delayed here.”
Caffran, Muril and Jajjo looked solemn. Feygor shook his head. Gutes sat down, tutting. Brostin growled an
unhappy curse.
Cuu asked the obvious question. “Who goes?”
“Who’s fast?” Mkvenner replied. “You,” said Feygor.
“I’ll be staying here,” said Mkvenner. He’d suggested the plan. He wouldn’t leave the hard part to them.
“Then Muril or Jajjo,” said Feygor. “Maybe Cuu. He’s light on his toes.”
“Who’s going to decide?” asked Caffran.
“I am,” said Mkvenner, and no one argued. “Jajjo. You’re up. Take the bare minimum so you move light. Don’t
stop for anything.”
The young Vervunhiver nodded. He was swallowing hard. The weight of responsibility scared him. So did
Mkvenner’s trust. Worst of all was the idea he was leaving them behind. They were going to die to buy him time.
“Come on,” said Mkvenner. “Get going. There’s no time to waste.”
They all said their goodbyes to Jajjo in turn. Caffran and Gutes helped him pare down his kit and wished him
well.
Feygor tried to say something and then just nodded, lost for words. Brostin slapped him on the back and told him
not to feth up. Muril filled a pair of water canteens for Jajjo to take with him. “Good luck,” she said.
“I wish he’d picked you,” Jajjo told her.
“Me too,” she smiled, “but not for the reason you think.”
“You can do it, Jaj,” Cuu said, winking at the cadet scout. “Sure as sure, you can.”
Jajjo left by the front door, into the rain and the bad light.
He turned back once, to look at Mkvenner. “Sir, I—”
“Go,” said Mkvenner.
And Jajjo was gone.
Mkvenner shut and bolted the front door. Feygor was already deploying the remaining members of the detail to fire
positions. He sent Muril to the first floor, to check what shape Larkin was in and take up a sniping position. “Use
Larkin’s long-las if he’s out of it,” Feygor instructed.
In the hallway, she passed Mkvenner heading back from the front door.
“Sir,” she said.
“Trooper?”
“I know things have gone… bad,” she began. “But for the record… for what that’s worth… I wish you’d taken me
more seriously during this patrol.”
“You don’t think I’ve taken you seriously?”
“I want to be a scout, sir. All the way along, you’ve given the opportunities to Jajjo, brought him along. Even now,
even this. He gets trusted with the break out run.”
“You know why I chose him over you?”
“No sir.”
“You’re a better shot, Muril. We need you here. When we… if we get back, I’ll be making a recommendation to
Mkoll. Scout advancement.”
“For Jajjo?”
“For both of you. I’ve been impressed with your work from the moment you signed up. Jajjo needed a bit of extra
coaching to make the grade.”
She opened her mouth, then closed it again. She wasn’t quite sure what to say.
Then the opportunity was gone anyway. They both started as they heard a flurry of explosions from the back of the
house.
Nineteen detail had set half their tube-charges in the undergrowth and outbuildings along the back of the rear plot.
Brostin had found some bales of fence twine in the cellar and they’d rigged tripwires.
The first intruders into the garden, moving clumsily in the heavy rain, found the wires with their boots. A whole
cluster of charges had gone off along the ragged rear wall and demolished it completely. Two more had been
triggered at the top of the ditch on the east side of the garden. The Blood Pact troopers, so far invisible in the
downpour, began shooting at the house. The defenders at the manse fired back a few discouraging blasts. After a
minute or so there was another flash and boom from the left side of the property line as another set of charges was
tripped.
The firing stopped. The Blood Part had fallen back again.
Muril went to fetch Larkin’s long-las, but found it in his hands. He was crouched by one of the bedroom windows,
scanning the rain outside. “You all right?” she asked.
“Yeah,” he said. He didn’t look it. He looked dreadful. His thin face was almost white except for the livid
bruising, and his eyes were dark hollows.
“I feel better,” he said. “Really. I feel better for not… taking that shot.”
“Good,” she said. “We’ll get Cuu, Larks. We’ll get out of this and get him. I saw him try to kill you, remember?
We’ll talk to Corbec. Tell him everything.”
“Okay,” said Larkin.
“I mean… Cuu, Feygor, Brostin… Gutes too, I guess. They’re going to be up on charges for what they did here.
Feygor as good as deserted for a few days. I can’t believe Ven won’t make a full report. And we’ll make a full
report of our own about Cuu.”
“Good,” he said.
“So… you fit to do some hunting?”
“I’m fit,” he nodded, settling his long-las.
“I’ll be down the landing in the end bedroom.”
“Okay.”
She disappeared. He turned back to his scope. For a moment, he couldn’t see the garden or the fringe of woods at
all. Just oblong pink stars and firecrackers.
He blinked, then blinked again, until his vision cleared.
Half an hour later, the Blood Pact returned. In the makeshift pillbox of the greenhouse, Caffran thought he saw
movement in the rain, and craned his head up over the edge of the old bedstead and the sacking.
He heard a noise. A hollow puff followed by a whine. Then another. Then yet another.
He knew that sound.
“Incoming!” he yelled.
The first mortar shell blew a hole in the middle of the lawn and threw clods of torn earth into the air Another
made a fireball halfway down the garden’s east wall and stone chips rattled down with the rain. A third hit the
roofless coal bunker.
The shells kept coming, pounding the rear lawn with fierce explosions. Then autocannons opened up in the treeline,
stitching the back of the house.
Mkvenner was down at the barricade with Cuu. Any moment now, and a mortar round would flatten the
greenhouse and Caffran with it.
“Fall back! Caff, fall back!” he shouted. The heavy structure of the house itself at least offered some protection.
Caffran was curled up protectively, trying to keep an eye out. A shell went off right outside, shaking the
greenhouse and spraying him with dirt.
“Caffran!”
“Wait!” he shouted back.
Under cover of the furious mortar and cannon fire, the troopers began their assault. Caffran glimpsed red-dad
figures pouring in through the rubble at the back of the lawn, some crawling along the side ditches or below what
was left of the back wall. Now small-arms fire came their way too.
He waited as long as he dared, until enemy shapes had almost reached the sundial half-way down the lawn.
He yanked the twine in his hand. The cord was tied off to the det-tapes of their remaining tubes, buried in the lawn
itself. They went off in rapid series, hurling two or three bodies into the air.
Satisfied, Caffran leapt up, and scrambled out through the back of the greenhouse into the yard. Las-rounds flew
past him. A mortar bomb exploded in the kitchen garden off to his left, and then another hit the greenhouse squarely.
The blast threw him onto his face. Mkvenner dashed across to him and dragged him back towards the kitchen
doorway where Brostin was covering them. Cuu had already run inside out of the deluge.
Mkvenner got Caffran into the kitchen as two more mortar shells hit the barricade and the remains of the coal
bunker. Stone fragments peppered the back wall of the manse. Everyone firing from a window ducked. A further
shell hit the west side of the wall and brought the roof down into the pantry with a terrible crash.
“Okay?” Mkvenner snapped at Caffran. Caffran was dazed, and his shoulders and the backs of his legs were
covered in shrapnel cuts.
“Fine!” he gasped, and got up to join Brostin at the door. “Get that flamer up!” Mkvenner said. “They’ll be in
range soon!”
The house shook as another mortar struck it. Broken tiles avalanched down into the yard. There were Blood Pact
troopers all over the rear lawn now, coming in low on the far side of the barricade and the shredded greenhouse.
Thick smoke and the flash of explosions fogged most of the view. The Ghosts fired at every target they could make
out. From the first floor, Muril and Larkin were making the best of the kills.
“Somebody else get upstairs!” Feygor bellowed, blasting from the main kitchen window. Cuu leapt up and ran.
“The right! They’re getting round from the fething right!” Gutes yelled over the link from the dining room.
Mkvenner moved to the kitchen door and peered out east. Over the burning vestiges of the coal bunker, he could see
Gutes’ las-fire hammering at the hedge-veiled ditch running up the side of the manse.
“Keep that up, Gutes!” he snarled. “Keep them ducking! I’ll come around the front and set up a crossfire!”
“Read that!” Gutes sang back.
Mkvenner ran back along the hall from the kitchen, and unbolted the front door. The house vibrated with the rattle
of gunfire and the batter of the mortars. The pots and pans on the stairs were quivering and spilling their contents as
the whole manse shook. He felt a particularly loud bang that sounded like a mortar had taken the roof in. Mkvenner
realised it was simply the thunder splitting right overhead.
He got the door open and edged out into the rain, weapon up, moving round the eastern side of the building. The
roar of battle floated round from the rear.
The Blood Pact was already tearing through the ditch hedge into the front lawn area. One spotted Mkvenner, but
the scout shot him dead before he could raise either weapon or cry. He fired again. Two more toppled backwards
into the hedge, arms flailing.
Three more opened fire, and Mkvenner was forced to dodge back into the cover of the porch. Las-rounds whirred
off the stone porch posts. From cover, he managed to hit two of the attackers and then made a dash for the hedge,
hoping to cut off the ditch with an enfilade.
A grenade tumbled through the rain. Mkvenner threw himself out of the way, but still the blast lifted him and
slammed him into the long, wet grass of the lawn.
He came round again moments later to see an iron mask leering at him, and a blade striking at his throat.
Mkvenner rolled and kicked his legs round, smashing the Blood Pact trooper over. Another one lunged at the
Tanith with his bayonet, but Mkvenner grabbed the barrel, wrenched it out of the enemy’s hands, and killed him with
a savage blow using the stock. A las-round cracked at him from point-blank range, but Mkvenner had crouched low,
and came up, scything the bayonet of the captured weapon through the belly of the third attacker. Without looking, he
planted a kick backwards, breaking the neck of the first man, who was now trying to get up from the grass.
But there were more of them, so many more. Almost a dozen, rushing him, some firing. He sidestepped another
bayonet, and a las-round ripped through his right thigh. Fuelled with pain, he rammed the blade of his borrowed rifle
through the neck of the closest invader.
Full auto las-fire tore across the lawn, making trails of steam in the downpour. Three Blood Pacters fell
immediately, then a fourth. Mkvenner opened fire with his lasrifle and took out two more before turning and sprinting
for the porch.
In the porch doorway, Peterik stood, blasting furiously with Rerval’s lasgun. Full auto.
The remaining Blood Pact exposed on the lawn either died or fled.
Mkvenner tumbled in beside him. “Thank you,” he said.
“You need to get that leg wound treated,” said Peterik. “I’ll do it later, if there’s a later,” said Mkvenner. “Right
now, we have to hold the front of the house You up to that?” Peterik nodded. “Yes, sir. I am.”
At the rear, a series of mortar rounds had struck the yard and blown paving slabs through the kitchen wall. Another
two shells had slammed into the pantry, already a ruin. Caffran and Feygor were down behind the cast-iron bulk of
the stove, firing through the shattered hole that had once been the main window. The kitchen door had been blown off
its hinges, but Brostin was in the doorway, revving his flamer.
A trio of Blood Pact troops leapt the barricade and charged the kitchen. Brostin hosed them and they torched in
their tracks, the grenades they carried blowing out and showering the fractured yard with metal chips, pieces of
gristle and burning scraps of fabric. Brostin nursed the flamer, and sent a second flare right over the barricade,
sizzling in the rain. They could hear screams. An enemy trooper, burning across his back and legs, ran hopelessly
towards the greenhouse and fell when Feygor shot him.
Brostin had an infamous affinity with fire. Now the enemy was in range, he started bursting sprays of liquid flame
up over the barricade and the wall of the kitchen garden, sliding it round angles that las-rounds couldn’t touch. He
washed the jumbled wood of the felled green house with a blanket of warm, orange fire, blistering the old paint and
cooking the wood, and then ignited the toasted kindling with a spear of blue, super-hot fire. Another enemy voice
rose up in a scream. A blizzard of touched-off grenades added to the raging fire.
The mortar rounds still thumped in. Caffran flinched as he heard one go through the roof. Cannon fire raked the
back wall, splitting exposed brickwork and stone. The manse’s original lime wash render had long since been shot
away.
Feygor looked across at Caffran as they ducked another salvo.
“This what you wanted to stay here for?” he asked, sarcastically. Feygor always sounded sarcastic, but this was
the real thing.
“No,” said Caffran. He pointed to the Tanith regimental badge on his jacket. “I wanted to stay for this.”
Brostin’s flamer spluttered and whooshed again. The stink of burning promethium filled the kitchen.
“They’re rushing us!” Brostin yelled. “They’re rushing us!”
It was over, Larkin knew. The manse was falling apart under the mortar rounds, and the back of the house was under
assault from a battalion-strength enemy unit. The Blood Pact was in the side ditch too, he could hear that, and round
the front.
He made what shots he could, knocking down scarlet shapes on the lawn and behind the barricade. But one thing
was for sure. There were more enemy troopers outside than he had hotshots left in his satchel.
He wondered if they’d bought enough time. He wondered where Jajjo was. He wondered if anyone would ever
know what a thing they’d done there this day. That handful of them, against an army.
His vision was going again. The lights were dancing. He blinked hard and shook his head, trying to clear his eyes.
Shaking his head made it feel like he was sloshing his brains around.
He wondered if the pain would overcome him before the Blood Pact reached him. Which would be quicker?
Which would hurt less?
He took another shot, but missed. He fired again, and missed a second time. His eyes were so foggy and the pain
so almighty. Pink, oblong stars. Firecrackers. Firecrackers…
A hand grabbed him by the back of the neck and slammed his face into the window sill. Larkin squealed in pain
and passed out briefly.
Lijah Cuu held him by the back of his head, fingers pressing like iron tongs into the damaged region of the sniper’s
skull.
Larkin writhed, tears of pain rushing down his ashen cheeks.
“What…? What…?” he mumbled.
“We’re dead now, Tanith, sure as sure. They’re in at the doors and windows. We’re finished. Except I’m not
finished. I’m not going anywhere, even all the way to hell, without set-ding my business.”
“Feth!” screamed Larkin, trying to struggle free. Cuu’s hands twisted at the fracture in the back of his skull and he
gagged and howled. Blood spurted from Larkin’s nostrils. “You crazy bastard!” he spluttered. “This isn’t—”
“What? What, you little Tanith gak-face? The right time? That’s funny, sure as sure. You have to pay, and if this
isn’t the time, there’ll never be another.”
Cuu wrenched at Larkin’s head again, and the sniper threw up. Cuu shoved him off onto the mattress.
Larkin tried to move, but the oblong pink stars filled his vision, merged into one huge firecracker that blasted
through his mind.
He went into spasms. His back arched and his eyes rolled back until they were just bloodshot whites. Blood
spattered as he bit his tongue. As the seizure smashed through his stringy body and limbs, he made an unearthly
groan.
Cuu stepped back for a second in disgust. He drew his blade. Tanith straight silver, thirty centimetres long.
“You animal,” he growled, avoiding Larkin’s thrashing limbs. “Looks like I’ll be doing you a favour, you freak.”
He raised the knife.
“Get off him, you bastard!” Muril spat. She stood in the doorway of the bedroom, her lasrifle aimed at Cuu’s scarsplit
face.
She edged towards him. “You shit. You little shit.”
Cuu rose, grinned his grin. “I was just trying to help him, girly. Look at him. He’s spazzing out. Let’s help him
before he bites through his gakking tongue.”
“Leave him alone! I saw you, Cuu. I saw what you were doing.”
“I wasn’t doing nothing.”
“You were going to kill him. Like you killed Bragg. And God-Emperor knows who else. You piece of shit.”
“So what are you going to do, eh? Eh, girly? You gonna shoot me?”
“I might.”
“We’re all dead anyway. Listen to the crap out there. They must be into the kitchen by now. Go ahead, shoot. It
won’t matter.”
“It’ll matter to me, Cuu. I’ll die happy.”
There was a stunning flash and a noise that sounded like thunder but wasn’t. The bedroom wall exploded in,
strewing bricks and plaster across the room. Another mortar shell came in through the attic overhead and blew out
the landing behind them.
Muril tried to get up in the choking dust and smoke. There was no sign of her weapon in the debris, so she drew
her warknife. Covered in shreds of plaster and curls of wallpaper, Larkin was still alive, and still convulsing and
groaning on the mattress by the window.
Muril stumbled towards him, searching for Cuu’s body in the rubble.
He was behind her, his blade in his hand.
With a cry, she swept round, as fast as any Tanith scout had ever moved, before or since.
Straight silver punched through flesh and bone and didn’t stop until it had impaled the beating heart.
Part of the roof collapsed. Piet Gutes ducked as falling rafters tore through the ceiling of the dining room, crushing
the long, polished table. The vases and precious porcelain tumbled off the shelves and smashed. The oil paintings
had caught fire.
Gutes got up, spitting out dust. The ceiling was open right to the sky and rain drizzled down. He took a look up
through the smashed window hole he had been defending. A red-painted light tank was rolling down the back lawn
from the trees, enemy troops surging around it. It raked up the overgrown grass and knocked over the sundial. When
it fired again, Gutes felt the manse shake. One of the pictures fell off the wall.
For the first time, he wondered who they were. Those solemn faces, dark with age, looking out from the frames.
Staring at him from so far away.
The pictures burned, despite the rain.
Gutes saw movement at the window and fired. An iron mask lurched back. Shots came in, ripping into the floor.
Gutes backed down the dining room, rainwater pattering off him, avoiding the smashed furniture and firing at the gap.
Multiple points of gunfire tore through in reply.
A single dining chair had survived the collapse of the rafters. Gutes sat down on it and continued to fire at the
window until his cell ran dry.
Haifa dozen Blood Part troopers scrambled in through the window, aiming their weapons at the lone figure sitting
on a chair at the end of the room.
They started to shoot.
Gutes wondered if the old woman would make it. He hoped so, though he doubted it. But it didn’t matter anymore.
Nothing matters if you’re far enough away. That’s what Piet Gutes had always told himself. And now, at last, he
was as far away as he could possibly be.
SEVENTEEN
FIRST AND LAST
“There can be honour in life, and honour in courage, and honour in action, but the most certain honour of all, to
man’s regret, is the honour in death.”
—Iaco Bousar Fep Golke, from his diaries
Smoke wept out of the forest like blood from a wound. The storm had passed, heading out at last across the peaks of
the Massif, but the air was still damp and the sky still black.
The sound of warfare continued to drift back through the pine stands of the Montorq. Small-arms, vehicle-mounted
cannon, grenades.
Colm Corbec jumped down from the eight-wheeler APC he’d been riding in and called out to the unit groups
ahead.
“Are we clear?” he yelled.
“Clear!” Varl shouted back.
“Go get me a sit-rep!” Corbec hollered.
“Sir,” said Jajjo, rising from his seat in the APC. “I’d like to—”
“I know you would, son,” said Corbec. “But I think maybe you should stay here for now.”
“I—”
“That’s an order, lad.”
Corbec wandered up through the trees towards the smoking shell of the old, lonely house. “The manse”, Jajjo had
called it.
To his left, light tanks and clanking sentinels of the Krassian Armoured ploughed up the valley through the trees,
lending fire support to the First fire-teams Corbec had sent in ahead of him. A fairly serious firefight was occurring
in the woods behind the house.
Commissar Hark trudged back to meet him. He was swinging a helmet in his hand.
“Trooper Jajjo was right,” Hark said, showing Corbec the helmet’s iron mask. “Blood Pact.”
“I never doubted Jajjo’s word for a moment,” said Corbec quietly. “The vox messages were plain enough.”
Hark nodded. “Just so, Corbec. I’m just glad we mustered up and got here in time.”
“Did we, but?” Corbec said wearily.
“We’ve driven the Blood Pact force right back into the woods. Major Vikkers of the Krassian armour says they’re
in retreat, falling back up the valley to the high pass. Looks like the Krassian tanks scored a good few kills against
enemy armour pieces and—”
“We’ve won, for today. I know that, Hark. I meant… did we get here in time for our own?” Corbec fell silent,
looking at the smoking ruin of the manse.
“Nine platoon’s checking it now. We—”
“Round up the rearguard and send them through,” Corbec told him abruptly. “I’m going to see for myself.”
Varl was waiting for him at the battered porch of the manse. Enemy dead littered the lawn. An old woman — Corbec
had no idea who the feth she was — was kneeling on the gravel path and weeping over the body of a young Alliance
soldier. On the steps of the porch, a Krassian corpsman was treating a Tanith trooper for multiple injuries. He was
shouting out for a medic as he worked. The Tanith man was so covered in blood he was unrecognisable at first. A
bad leg wound, a gut shot, a scalp wound, something messy through the left shoulder.
Corbec ignored Varl and knelt down beside the man. Only then did he realise it was Mkvenner.
“Feth, Ven! It was only meant to be a patrol!”
“That’s all it was,” said Mkvenner, weakly blinking blood out of his eyes.
“You’ll be okay,” Corbec said. “Make him okay, feth it!” he said, looking up at the frantic corpsman.
“You got our signal then?” Mkvenner whispered.
“If you’re going to waste talk, don’t state the fething obvious. We got it, Ven, we came. We kicked their arses back
into the woods. You did a fine job, you and the rest.”
“Commendations,” Mkvenner sighed.
“Just shut up now,” said Corbec.
Mkvenner shook his head. “I may not get another chance to say this, Colm. I commend them all. All of them. They
were true to the last. First and last. If Jajjo made it, then he deserves scout rank. Muril too, no question. Make sure
she knows I commended her. And I want a special mention put in to Alliance GSC. Will you do that for me, sir?”
“Of course I will.”
“Private First Class Rufo Peterik, Sixteenth Brunsgatters. For valour. Can you remember that name, Colm?”
“I will, but I won’t have to, Ven. ’Cause you’re fething well not going to die.”
Krassian medicae ran up the front lawn to assist the corps-man. Corbec rose and turned to Varl.
“Tell me. How bad?”
“Piet Gutes is dead in that room there. Looks like he gave a good account of himself. Rerval’s alive. Took a hit to
the face in an earlier phase of action. Docs are with him now.”
“That’s something,” Corbec sighed. He’d missed his vox man these last few days.
“Brostin, Feygor and Caffran made it too, though Brostin and Caff are hurt bad. Somehow Feygor came out
without a scratch.”
“Luck of the devil,” Corbec said. “What about the rest?”
“Larkin’s touch and go. Doc Mtane’s with him. Head wound. The doc doesn’t know if he’ll make it. Says we have
to get Larks back to Ins Arbor for surgery.”
“Feth,” said Corbec.
“I—” Varl began. “What?”
“I found Muril upstairs with Larks. The bastards had bayonetted her.”
Corbec closed his eyes. He felt a pain worse than any injury he’d ever received. “I want to go see her,” he said.
“Chief—” Varl tried to stop him. “You don’t want to see that.”
“I need to, Varl. I need to.” Corbec pushed past the sergeant and walked up the steps into the house.
In the doorway, he paused and glanced back at Varl.
“What about Cuu?”
“Oh, he made it,” Varl said.
There was a lot of commotion around the house. Not the same sort of commotion that had all but demolished it, but
still. Troop carriers were gliding up. Krassian tanks were churning up over the lawns and into the woods.
There was a gak of a fight going on up there in the trees.
Not his problem anymore.
Lijah Cuu sat on an old bench at the side of the front lawn and watched it all.
He licked the blood from the straight silver of his warknife and slid it away into its scabbard.
EIGHTEEN
ENDING IN THE MIDDLE
“When I speak of a body in this way, I mean the body as a figure for an armed force. To the leader, that force
becomes his body. He must care for it and drive it and feed it and see to its well-being and its ills. It thuswise
becomes his limbs, and organs of life and sense, the body militant. Thus the scale magnifies. All commanders and
their men are bodies in war, fighting and falling in the way of things as sole men fight and fall and shew their
woundings.”
—DeMarchese, On The Use of Armies
A week later, in the dismal streets of Gibsgatte, more rain fell.
Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt, still limping slightly from the rifle-round that had scraped him during the sixhour
break-out from the Shadik lines, came up the steps of the Sezaria, a gold-domed building that dominated the
skyline of the dirty northern city.
Bande Sezari sentries at the door checked his papers and then bowed to admit him, the struthid plumes in their
caps touching the floor.
Gaunt nodded to them with genuine respect. He knew who the Bande Sezari were now. He’d seen several of them
fight to the last.
An Alliance adjutant escorted him up three flights and along a splendid corridor of gilt-framed paintings. The
adjutant knocked at a set of painted doors and announced him.
“Colonel-Commissar Gaunt, sir.”
Gaunt stepped in, the doors dosing behind him, and saluted.
Supreme Commander Lyntor-Sewq rose, and came round his desk to greet Gaunt. “Good to see you, Gaunt”
“Sir.”
Lyntor-Sewq was a thin, bald man with a plucked moustache and limpid eyes. “How are you, sir?” he asked.
“Well enough.”
“Leg troubling you?”
“Not so much, thank you for asking.”
“Rough ride you must have had, getting out from the enemy lines that night.”
“Indeed, sir. It took us a day and a half, all told, laying low, moving when it was clear.”
“Your stealthing arts. Why, they’re the talk of the General Staff! You ran into trouble, though?”
“Yes, sir. Twice. The last time when we were almost clear. I lost a few good soldiers there.”
“A terrible shame, Gaunt Drink?”
“I’ll take a small amasec, sir.”
Lyntor-Sewq poured two drinks into priceless crystal glasses. He handed one to Gaunt. “Here’s to your efforts,
sir,” said the supreme commander.
“And my dead,” returned Gaunt.
“Quite so.” They sipped.
Lyntor-Sewq led him over to a chart table on which the full expanse of the Aexe Cardinal war was laid out.
“Many doubted you, Gaunt. You and the Imperials. Of course, we were grateful for your intervention. But still… I
won’t ever mention your name to Redjacq Ankre.”
“If I never see him again, sir, I will not be forlorn.”
Lyntor-Sewq chuckled. “We got the guns. The siege-guns. I’m sure you’ve been told. They were stuck right where
you’d stranded them. A flight of marauder aircraft destroyed them the following night. Those marauders. Fine
vessels. I’d dearly like a few to bolster the Alliance Air Corps.”
“I’m sure General Van Voytz will oblige. Actually, I expected to see him here today.”
Lyntor-Sewq smiled. “He’s gone south. To Frergarten. We’re pushing up through the Montorq now, you know. And
that’s where I must thank you again. Your scout units, stemming the tide, calling a warning. Alerting us to the
presence of the arch-enemy elite on Aexegarian soil. My plans have changed, of course. Radically. But I’m focusing
on the new initiative, and I think we may have turned a corner. The war will be over by Candlemas.”
Gaunt finished his drink. “I hope so, sir,” he said. “Either that, or this war will last forever.”
Lyntor-Sewq looked down into his glass grimly. “It takes as long as it takes,” he said.
Gaunt nodded. He’d been reviewing battle reports for the last week. They’d killed the super-guns and fronted the
invasion through the Montorq and even so both actions seemed like tiny pieces of a whole Sarvo had been lost. The
Meiseq Box punctured. The lower Naeme Valley overrun. The Ostlund Shield broken in two places. For every
victory, a loss. For every metre taken, a death. The war simply ground on, like a furnace fed by manpower.
“I presume you’ll be deploying my units to new locations?”
“Actually, no.” The supreme commander handed Gaunt a data-slate. “New orders. From the Warmaster, relayed by
the Astropathicus. Your regiment is being retasked. Navy transports are moving in system to collect you.”
Gaunt looked at the slate.
He felt a peculiar sense of shock. He’d never been pulled out of a warzone before the fighting was done. In his
opinion, there was still a year or more of bloodshed to go on Aexe Cardinal before the Imperium could claim
victory. Macaroth was pulling the Tanith First out. It was like ending in the middle of things. According to the slate,
elements of the Second Crusade Army were moving in to replace them and finish the job.
And his heart skipped when he saw the destination the Ghosts were heading to.
“The Emperor protect you, where you’re going,” Lyntor-Sewq said.
“Thank you, sir.”
“I only asked you here today to give you this.”
He reached into his desk and produced a slim, oblong box covered in gold-flecked blue satin. Lyntor-Sewq
opened it.
A Gold Aquila, pinned to a white silk ribbon, lay in the cushioned interior.
“This is to acknowledge your devoted service to Aexe Cardinal. The Order of the Eagle. The greatest honour it is
in the high sezar’s gift to bestow.”
Gaunt had seen one before, pinned proudly to Iaco Fep Golke’s coat. He dearly wanted to take the medal and stuff
it into Lyntor-Sewq’s throat until he choked. Or at least refuse it. But he knew the trouble that would follow if he did
either.
He allowed the supreme commander to pin it on him, and saluted. He’d wear it now, and never again.
As Gaunt strode out through the echoing hallway of the Sezari, an officer of the Bande Sezari raced up to him with a
package wrapped in brown paper.
“Sir,” he said. “Tactician Biota said to expect you and give this to you with his compliments.”
Gaunt took the package with a vague nod.
Beltayn was waiting outside, sitting behind the wheel of a huge black staff car. His thumb was better. He could do
gears now.
Gaunt got in the back. “Sir?”
“Take us back to Rhonforq, Beltayn,” Gaunt said.
The motor car roared off from the long steps and turned into Gibsgatte’s cross-town traffic, heading south.
In the back of the car, Gaunt stripped the brown paper off the parcel. Inside was an old edition of a book. He
checked the spine: DeMarchese, “On The Use of Armies”.
Gaunt smiled, despite the deep misgivings aching through his heart.
There was a handwritten note from Biota tucked inside the cover.
“Colonel-commissar,” it began, “I hope you find this instructive. I salvaged it from the lord general’s library and
I’m sure he won’t miss it. As to the question you asked me…”
At Gaunt’s urging, they drove through the woodlands around Shonsamarl on their way back to Rhonforq. The sunlight
played through the trees, dappling the car as it switched back and forth down the narrow, meandering lanes.
Beltayn pulled the car to a halt.
“We’re lost, aren’t we?” Gaunt said.
“No, sir,” said Beltayn. “I’m Tanith. I don’t get lost.”
“You got lost on the way through here.”
Beltayn shrugged. “All I know is, sir, this is the place. Don’t ask me why it’s not here anymore.”
Gaunt got out of the car The woodland looked familiar, very familiar. He was sure Beltayn was right.
There just wasn’t a chapel there anymore. There was no trace of the Chapel of the Holy Light Abundant, Veniq.
Nothing, except the lingering perfume of a particular flower.
Beltayn stepped over to join him. “Where did it go, sir?” he asked.
Gaunt handed Beltayn Biota’s note so he could read it.
“As to the question you asked me, I have researched the Imperial records and found a mention of an Adeptus
Sororitas warrior named Elinor Zaker. She was a key member of Saint Sabbat’s retinue during the original crusade,
and died on Herodor six thousand years ago.”
Beltayn shivered. “Something’s awry, sir,” he said.
“I think so,” said Ibram Gaunt.
All along the 58th sector of the Peinforq Line, the word was spreading. The Ghosts were being pulled out.
Enervated, Daur went down the line, distributing marshalling orders to the platoons. They were to pull back the
following night to the cathedral city of Ghrennes and await Navy collection.
The orders didn’t say where they were heading, but all the troops were excited. It sounded significant. And most
of them were just desperate to get out of the trench horror of Aexe.
Daur was torn. He wanted to see the First out of the murderous front line, but he was going to miss the XO role.
Ana Curth had told him that Rawne was almost fit. In a day or two, the major would return to duty.
Daur conveyed the orders dutifully, getting the regiment to prep for off-lift.
He got Haller’s platoon roused up, then Obel’s.
Then he walked down the zagging trench to Soric’s command post.
Daur looked in through the gas curtain. “Chief? Get your men ready,” he said. “We’re shipping out tomorrow
night.”
Soric was seated at the table in his gloomy dugout. He held a twist of blue paper in his fingers.
“Right you are, captain,” he said. “I know.”
Daur shrugged and left.
Soric looked down at the paper in his hands. “Ghosts leaving. Tomorrow night,” it read.
Soric balled it up and threw it aside.
Vivvo suddenly peered in through the curtain. “Word is we’re moving on, chief. Any idea where to?”
“No,” snapped Soric.
“Okay,” said Vivvo warily, backing out and leaving him alone.
Soric sat back. The gleaming brass message shell sat on the camp table in front of him. He waited, hoping,
wishing. Then he reached forward and grabbed the shell.
Agun Soric unscrewed the cap and shook out the spill of blue paper.
He unfolded it and read what was written there, written in his own hand. One word. “Herodor.”

A WARHAMMER 40,000 NOVEL
The Guns Of Tanith
Gaunt’s Ghosts - 05
IT IS THE 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the
Emperor has sat immobile on the Golden Throne of Earth. He is the master of
mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might
of his inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with
power from the Dark Age of Technology. He is the Carrion Lord of the
Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he may
never truly die.
YET EVEN IN his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal
vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the daemon-infested miasma of the warp,
the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the
psychic manifestation of the Emperor's will. Vast armies give battle in his
name on uncounted worlds. Greatest amongst his soldiers are the Adeptus
Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades
in arms are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence
forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the tech-priests of the Adeptus
Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely
enough to hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants - and
worse.
TO BE A man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to
live in the cruellest and most bloody regime imaginable. These are the tales
of those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and
understanding, for in the grim dark future there is only war. There is no peace
amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter
of thirsting gods.
“Late in the sixteenth year of the Sabbat Worlds Crusade, Warmaster
Macaroth’s incisive advance on the strategically vital Cabal system, which
had been so strong and confident in its initial phase, juddered to a halt.
Three-quarters of the target planets, including two of the infamous
fortress-worlds, had been taken by Imperial Crusade forces and the
occupying armies of the Chaos archenemy routed or put to flight. But, as
many Navy commanders had warned, the push had overreached itself,
creating as it did a salient vulnerable on three sides.
“Orlock Gaur, one of the arch-enemy’s most able warlords, making good
use of the vicious loxatl mercenaries, drove an inspired counter-offensive
along the advance’s coreward flank, taking in quick succession, Enothis,
Khan V, Caius Innate and Belshiir Binary. Vital supply lanes, especially
those providing fuel resources for the stretched Crusade fleet, were cut.
Macaroth’s valiant gamble, which he had hoped might win him the
campaign outright, now seemed foolhardy.
Unless fresh supply lines could be forged, and new fuel resources made
available, the hard-won Cabal Salient would crumble. At best, the Imperial
advance would be forced into retreat. At worst, it would collapse and be
overrun.
“Warmaster Macaroth hastily redeployed significant elements of his
spinward flank in a make or break effort to open up new lines of supply. All
those involved knew the outcome of this improvised action would certainly
decide the fate of the Cabal Salient, and perhaps the war itself.
“The key target worlds were the promethium-rich planets of Gigar,
Aondrift Nova, Anaximander and Mirridon, the forge world Urdesh,
Tanzina IV and Ariadne with their solid fuel reserves, and the vapour mills
of Rydol and Phantine…”
—from A History of the Later Imperial Crusades
PROLOGUE: STRAIGHT SILVER
COMBAT DISPERSAL DROGUE NIMBUS,
WEST CONTINENTAL REACHES,
PHANTINE, 211.771, M41
“I don’t think any of us knew what we were getting into. Feth, I’m glad I
didn’t know what we were getting into.”
—Sgt. Varl, 1st Team leader, Tanith First
A choke-hold was the last thing he expected.
Trooper Hlaine Larkin landed with a jarring thump in a place so dark he
couldn’t even see his hand in front of his face. He immediately got right
down like the colonel had told him in practice. Belly down.
Somewhere in the dark, to his right, he heard Sergeant Obel scolding the
men in the fireteam to hug cover. That was a joke for starters. Cover? How
could they find cover when they couldn’t even see the arse of the man in
front?
Larkin lay down on his front and reached about until his fingers found an
upright surface. A stanchion, maybe. A bulkhead. He slithered towards it, and
then unshipped his long-las from its soft plastic cover. That he could do by
touch alone. His fingers ran along the nalwood furniture, the firing
mechanism, the oiled top-slot ready to take his nightscope.
Someone cried out in the darkness nearby. Some poor feth who’d snapped
an ankle in the drop.
Larkin felt the panic rising in him. He pulled his scope from its bag,
slotted it into place, popped the cap, and was about to take a look when an
arm locked around his throat.
“You’re dead, Tanith,” said a voice in his ear.
Larkin twisted, but the grip refused to break. His blood thudded in his
temples as the choke-hold tightened and pinched his windpipe and carotid
arteries. He tried to call “Man out!” but his throat was shut.
There was a popping sound, and illumination flares banged off overhead.
The drop area was suddenly, starkly lit. Pitch-black shadows, angular and
hard, stabbed across him.
He saw the knife.
Tanith silver, straight, thirty centimetres long, hovering in front of his face.
“Feth!” Larkin gurgled. A whistle blew, shrill and penetrating.
“Get up, you idiot,” ordered Commissar Viktor Hark, striding down the field
line of the bay with the whistle in his hand. “You, trooper! Get up! You’re
facing the wrong damned way!”
The roof-lamps began to fizzle on, drenching the wide bay with stale
yellow light. In amongst the litter of packing crates and corrugated iron,
soldiers in black combat fatigues blinked and got to their feet.
“Sergeant Obel!”
“Commissar?”
“Get up here!”
Obel hurried forward to meet the commissar. Behind Hark, harmless lowpulse
las-fire flashed in the gloom.
“Stop that!” Hark yelled, turning. “They’re all dead anyway! Cease fire
and reset your position to starting place two!”
“Yes, sir!” a voice floated back from the enemy side.
“Report?” Hark said, looking back at the red-faced Obel.
“We dropped and dispersed, sir. Theta pattern. We had cover—”
“How wonderful for you. Do you suppose it matters that eighty per cent of
your unit was facing the wrong way?”
“Sir. We were… confused.”
“Oh dear. Which way’s north, sergeant?”
Obel pulled his compass from his fatigues. “That way, sir.”
“At last. Those dials glow in the dark for a reason, sergeant.”
“Hark?”
Commissar Hark snapped to attention. A tall figure in a long storm coat
walked across the bay to join him. He looked for all the world like Hark’s
shadow, drawn out and extended by the bad lights.
“How do you think you did?” asked Colonel-Commissar Ibram Gaunt.
“How do I think I did? I think you slaughtered us. And deservedly.”
Gaunt covered a smile. “Be fair, Hark. Those men there are all behind
cover. They’d have soon realised which way was up if that’d been real lasfire.”
“That’s generous, sir. I figure it a good seventy-five point win to the
passive team.”
Gaunt shook his head. “No more than fifty-five, sixty points. You still had
an opening you could have used.”
“I hate to correct you, sir,” said a tall, lean Tanith in a camo-cape who
wandered casually out of Obel’s lines. He was screwing the top back onto a
paint stick.
“Mkvenner?” Gaunt greeted the grim scout, one of Sergeant Mkoll’s elite.
“Go on then, disabuse me.”
Mkvenner had the sort of long, high cheek-boned face that made everything
he said seem chilling and dark. He had a blue half-moon tattoo under his right
eye. Many reckoned he looked a lot like Gaunt himself, though Mkvenner’s hair
was Tanith black where Gaunt’s was straw blond. And Gaunt was bigger too:
taller, wider, more imposing.
“We heard them drop in during the blackout, and I got five men in amongst
them.”
“Five?”
“Bonin, Caober, Doyl, Cuu and myself. Knives only,” he added, gesturing
with the paint stick. “We splashed a good eight of them before the lights came
on.”
“How could you see?” asked Obel plaintively.
“We wore blindfolds until the lights went out. Our night vision was
adjusted.”
“Good work, Mkvenner,” sighed Gaunt. He tried to avoid Hark’s stern
look. “You had us cold,” said Hark. “Evidently,” replied Gaunt.
“So… they’re not ready. Not for this. Not for a night drop.”
“They’ll have to be!” Gaunt growled. “Obel! Get your sorry excuses for
soldiers up into those towers again! We’ll reset and do it over!”
“Yes, sir!” Obel replied smartly. “Uhm… Trooper Loglas snapped his shin
in the last exercise. He’ll need a medic.”
“Feth!” said Gaunt. “Right, go. Everyone else, reset!”
He waited for a moment as medics Lesp and Chayker carried the moaning
Loglas out of the bay. The rest of Obel’s detachment were clambering up the
scaffolding of the sixteen metre tall drop towers and recoiling the rappelling
cables, ready to resume drop positions.
“Lights down!” yelled Gaunt. “Let’s do this again until we get it right!”
“You heard him!” gasped Larkin. “It’s over! We’re going again!”
“Lucky for you, Tanith.”
The choke-hold relaxed and Larkin fell sideways at last, panting for
breath.
Trooper Lijah Cuu stepped over him and sheathed his silver blade.
“Still, I got you, Tanith. Sure as sure.”
Larkin gathered up his weapon, coughing. The whistle was shrilling again.
“Fething idiot! You nearly killed me!”
“Killing you was the point of the exercise, Tanith,” Cuu grinned, fixing the
flustered master-sniper with his feline gaze.
“You’re supposed to tag me with that!” Larkin snapped, nodding at the
unopened paint stick hooked in Cuu’s webbing.
“Oh, yeah,” marvelled Cuu, as if he’d never seen the stick before.
“Larkin! Trooper Larkin!” Sergeant Obel’s voice sang across the bay. “Do
you intend to join us?”
“Sir!” Larkin snapped, stuffing his long-las back into its cover.
“Double-time, Larkin! Come on!”
Larkin looked back at Cuu, another surly curse forming in his mouth. But
Cuu had disappeared.
Obel was waiting for him at the base of one of the towers. The last few men
were clambering up the scaffold, encumbered by full assault kit. A couple
had stopped at the foot of the tower to take sponges from a water can and
smear away the tell-tale traces of red paint from their fatigues. “Problem?”
asked Obel.
“No, sir,” said Larkin, adjusting the sling of his gun-case. “Except that
Cuu’s a fething menace.”
“Unlike the actual enemy, who is soft and cuddly. Get your scrawny butt up
that tower, Larkin.”
Larkin heaved himself up the metalwork. Overhead, the lighting rigs were
shutting off, one by one.
Sixteen metres up, there was a grilled shelf on which the men were
forming up in three lines. Ahead of them was a scaffolding arch that was
supposed to simulate the size and shape of a drop-ship’s exit hatch, and
which led out to a stepboard ramp that someone had dryly named “the plank”.
Gutes, Garond and Unkin, the three point men, were crouching there, dropcables
coiled on their laps. One end of each cable was secured to locking
damps on the gantry above the plank.
“In line, come on,” Obel muttered as he moved down the fireteams. Larkin
hurried to take his place.
“Dead, Larks?” asked Bragg, making space for him.
“Feth, yes. You?”
Bragg patted a red stain on his tunic that he hadn’t managed to sponge out.
“Never even saw ’em,” he said.
“Quiet in the line!” barked Obel. “Tokar! Tighten that harness or you’ll
hang up. Fenix… where are your fething gloves?”
The last of the lights were going out. Down below somewhere, Hark was
blowing his whistle.
Three short bursts. The two minutes ready call.
“Stand by!” Unkin called back down the waiting rows.
Larkin couldn’t see the men on the neighbouring towers. He couldn’t even
see the towers themselves. The gloom was worse than even the most
moonless night back on Tanith.
“Make way,” whispered a voice behind them. A hooded flashlight cast a
small green glow and showed another man joining them on the tower shelf.
It was Gaunt.
He moved in amongst them. “Listen up,” he hissed, just loud enough for
them all to hear. “I know you’re new to this drill, and that none of you like it
but we’ve got to get it down by the numbers. There’ll be no landing at
Cirenholm. I can guarantee that. The pilots are first class, and they’ll get us in
as close as possible, but even then it might be a lot further than sixteen
metres.”
Several troopers groaned.
“The drop cable’s thirty metres,” said Garond. “What happens if it’s
further than that sir?”
“Flap your arms,” said Gaunt. There was some chuckling.
“Hook up and slide fast. Keep your knees bent. And move. The drop-ships
can’t stay on station any longer than is absolutely necessary. You’re going out
three at a time, and there may be more than one man on a cable at any time.
When you reach the deck, move clear. Is that a bayonet, trooper?”
“Yes sir.”
“Put it away. No fixed blades until you’re down, not even in the real thing.
Weapons on safety. If you’ve got folding stocks, fold them. Get all your
harness and webbing straps tight and tuck them in. And remember, when the
real thing comes, you’ll all be in gas-hoods, which will add to the fun. I’m
sure Sergeant Obel has told you all this.”
“It tends to sink in when you repeat it sir,” said Obel.
“I’m sure it does.” Gaunt took off his storm coat and his cap and buckled
on a hook-belt. “Loglas is out so you’re a man short. I’ll stand in.” He took
his place in the number four slot of the right hand squad. Hark’s whistle
wailed out one long note. Gaunt snapped off his lamp. It was pitch dark.
“Let’s go,” he hissed. “Call the drill, sergeant.”
“Over the DZ!” Obel instructed, now speaking via the vox-headsets.
“Deploy! By the front! Cables out!”
“Cables away!” chorused the point men in the dark, spilling their lines
down expertly from the plank. They were already hooked up.
“Go!”
Larkin could hear the abrasive buzz of the cables as they went taut and
took the weight of the first men. “Go!”
Drizzles of low-pulse fire twinkled in the darkness below. Larkin stepped
up under the arch, holding the tunic tail of the man in front. Then the man was
gone.
“Go!”
He groped for the line, found it and snapped his arrester hook around it.
“Come on!”
Larkin pulled his harness tight and went over into space. He swung wildly.
The hook bucked and whined as its brake disk clamped at the cable. He
could smell nylon burning with the friction.
The impact seemed even harder than the last time. The deck smacked the
wind out of him. He struggled to release his hook, and rolled clear just
before the man after him came hissing down.
He was on his belly again, like last time. His shoulder nudged a hard
surface as he crawled forward and he moved his back against it. Where were
the flares? Where were the fething flares?
His long-las was out of its cover, and the scope in place. Someone ran
past him and his vox earpiece was busy with man to man signals.
Larkin sighted. The night scope gave him vision, showed him the world as
a green, phantom swirl. The enemy gun flashes were hot little spikes of light
that left afterimages on the viewfinder.
He saw a figure in cover to his left, down behind some oil drums.
It was Mkvenner, with a paint stick in his hand.
“Pop!” said Larkin, and his gun fizzled a low-energy charge.
“Feth!” said Mkvenner, and sat back hard. “Man out!”
Flares burst overhead. Crackling, blue-white light shimmered down over
the DZ.
“Up and select!” Obel ordered curtly over the vox-link.
Larkin looked around. They were in place, facing the right fething way this
time.
Men moved forward. Larkin stayed put. He was more use to them static
and hunting.
He saw Bonin stalking two of his team and popped him out of the game
too. Flash charges went off down to Larkin’s right. The bay rang. Some of
Obel’s squad, along with men from the neighbouring tower, had engaged fullon
with the passive team. Larkin heard the call “Man out!” five or six times.
Then he heard someone cry out in real pain.
Hark’s whistle was blowing. “Cease! Cease and stay put!”
The lights came on again, slowly and feebly.
Hark appeared. “Better. Better, Obel.”
The men began getting up. Bonin moved past Larkin. “Nice one,” he said.
Gaunt walked out into one of the pools of light. “Mkvenner?” he called.
“Score it up.”
“Sir,” said Mkvenner. The scout looked unhappy.
“You get tagged?” Gaunt asked.
“Think it was Larkin, sir. We got about thirty points that time, all told.”
“That should make you a bit happier,” Gaunt said to Hark.
“Medic!”
Everyone turned. Bragg stumbled out from behind some empty munition
boxes, clutching a deep red stain on his shoulder that wasn’t paint.
“What happened?” asked Gaunt.
“Cuu stuck me,” growled Bragg.
“Trooper Cuu, front and centre!” Hark bellowed.
Cuu emerged from cover. His face, split by an old scar from top to bottom,
was expressionless.
“You want to explain?” Hark asked him.
“It was dark. I tussled with the big f… with Bragg. I was sure I had my
paint stick in my hand, sir. Sure as sure.”
“He jabbed me with his fething blade,” Bragg complained sourly.
“That’s enough, Bragg. Go find a medic,” said Gaunt. “Cuu. Report to me
at sixteen hundred for discipline detail.”
“Sir.”
“Salute, damn you.” Cuu made a quick salute.
“Get into line and don’t let me see that blade again until we’re in combat.”
Cuu wandered back to the passive unit. As he passed Larkin, he turned and
glared at the sniper with his cold, green eyes.
“What are you looking at, Tanith?”
“Nothing,” said Larkin.
“Let me explain,” said Sergeant Ceglan Varl. He laid his guard-issue lasrifle
on the counter of the Munitorium store and brushed the backs of his fingers
down the length of it like a showman beginning a trick. “This here is a
standard pattern mark III lascarbine, stamped out by the armourers of Tanith
Magna, God-Emperor rest their oily fingers. Notice the wooden stock and
sleeve. That’s nice, isn’t it? Real Tanith nal-wood, the genuine article. And
the metalwork, all buffed down to reduce shine. See?”
The Munitorium clerk, a paunchy, dimpled man with greasy red hair and
starchy robe, stood on the other side of the counter and stared back at Varl
without any show of interest.
“Here’s the thing,” said Varl, tapping the weapon’s ammunition slot.
“That’s a size three power port. Takes size three power cells. They can be
short, long, sickle-pattern, box-form or drum, but they have to be size three or
they won’t fit. Size three. Thirty mil with a back-slant lock. With me so far?”
The clerk shrugged.
Varl took a power clip from his musette bag and slid it across the counter.
“You’ve issued my company with size fives. Size fives, you see? They’re
thirty-four mil and flat-fronted. You can tell they’re not threes just by looking
at the size of them, but if you’re in any doubt, the fething great ‘5’ stencilled
on the side is a handy guide.”
The clerk picked up the dip and looked at it.
“We were instructed to issue ammunition. Eight hundred boxes. Standard
pattern.”
“Standard size three,” said Varl patiently. “That’s standard size five.”
“Standard pattern, they said. I’ve got the docket.”
“I’m sure you have. And the Tanith First-and-Only have got boxes and
boxes of ammo that they can’t use.”
“It said standard pattern.”
Varl sighed. “Everything’s standard pattern! This is the Imperial fething
Guard! Standard pattern boots, standard pattern mess-tins, standard pattern
bodybags! I’m a standard pattern infantryman and you’re a standard pattern
no-neck, and any minute now my standard pattern fist is going to smack your
nose bone back into your very sub-standard pattern brain!”
“There’s no need to be abusive,” said the clerk.
“Oh, I think there might be,” said Sergeant Gol Kolea quietly, joining Varl
at the counter. Kolea was a big man, an ex-miner from Verghast, and he
towered over his Tanith comrade. But it wasn’t his size that immediately
alarmed the clerk. It was his soft tone and calm eyes. Varl had been spiky and
aggressively direct, but the newcomer oozed potent wrath held in restraint
below the surface.
“Tell him, Gol,” said Varl.
“I’ll show him,” said Kolea and waved his hand. Guardsmen, all of them
the so-called Ghosts, began to troop in, lugging ammo boxes. They started to
stack them on the counter until there wasn’t any more room. Then they started
to pile them on the deck.
“No, no!” cried the clerk. “We’ll have to get counter-signed dockets
before you can return these.”
“Tell you what,” said Kolea, “let’s not. Let’s just swap these for boxes of
size threes.”
“We… we don’t have size threes,” said the clerk.
“You what?” Varl cried.
“We weren’t told to carry any. On Phantine, size five is the—”
“Don’t say standard pattern. Don’t say it!” warned Varl.
“You’re saying the blessed and hallowed Munitorium has no ammunition
for the entire Tanith regiment?” asked Kolea.
“Feth!” Varl cursed. “We’re about to assault… what’s it called?”
“Cirenholm,” said Kolea helpfully.
“That’s the place. We’re about to assault it and this is what you tell us?
What are we supposed to use?” Varl pulled his Tanith knife from its sheath
and showed the clerk the long, straight silver blade. “Are we supposed to
take the city using these?”
“If we have to.”
The Ghosts snapped to attention. Major Elim Rawne had wandered
silently into the store. “We’ve had to do worse. If Tanith straight silver is all
I have, then it’s all I need.”
The major looked at the clerk and the clerk shivered. Rawne’s gaze tended
to do that. There was a touch of snake about him, in his hooded eyes and cold
manner. He was slim, dark and good-looking and, like many of the Tanith
men, had a tattoo. Rawne’s was a small blue star under his right eye.
“Varl, Kolea… get your men back to the billet. Round up the other squad
leaders and run an inventory. I want to know just how much viable
ammunition we’ve got left. Account for all of it. Don’t let any of the men
stash stuff in socks or musette bags. Pool it all and we’ll distribute it evenly.”
The sergeants saluted.
“Feygor,” said Rawne, turning to his sinister adjutant. “Go with them and
bring the count back to me. Don’t take all day.”
Feygor nodded and followed the troopers out. “Now,” said Rawne, facing
the clerk again. “Let’s see what we can sort out…”
Trooper Brin Milo, the youngest Ghost, sat down on his cot and looked
across at the young man on the next bunk.
“That’s very nice,” said Milo, “and it will get you killed.”
The other man looked up, puzzled and wary. He was a Verghastite by the
name of Noa Vadim, one of the many new Ghosts recruited after the siege of
Vervunhive to replenish the ranks of the Tanith regiment. There was still a lot
of rivalry between the two camps. The Tanith resented the new intake, and
the Verghastites resented that resentment. In truth, they were slowly fusing
now. The regiment had endured the fight for the shrineworld of Hagia a few
months before and, as is ever the case with war, comradeship and a common
goal had alloyed the Tanith and Verghast elements into one strong company.
But still, Verghastites and Tanith were breeds apart. There were so many
little differences. Like accents — the gruff Vervunhive drawl beside the singsong
Tanith lilt. Like colouring — the Tanith were almost universally pale
skinned and dark haired where the Verghastites were a rather more mixed lot,
as was typical with a hive city of such size. The Verghastites’ weapons had
folding metal stocks and hand-plates where the guns of Tanith had sturdy
nalwood furniture.
Vadim held the biggest difference in his hands: the regimental pin. The
recruits from Vervunhive wore a silver axe-rake design denoting their home
world. The Tanith wore a gold, wreath-surrounded skull backed by a single
dagger that carried the motto “For Tanith, for the Emperor”.
“What do you mean, ‘killed’?” asked Vadim. He’d been polishing his axerake
pin with a hank of vizzy-cloth until it shone. “There’s a dress inspection
at twenty hundred.”
“I know… and there’s a night assault in the next day or two. Something that
shiny will pick up any backscattered light.”
“But Commissar Gaunt expects—”
“Gaunt expects every man to be battle-prepped when we fall in. That’s
what the inspection’s for. Ready for war, not ready for the parade ground.”
Milo tossed his own slouch cap across to the Vadim and the young
Vervunhiver caught it. “See?”
Vadim looked at the Tanith badge pinning back the brim-fold. It was clean,
but non-reflective, dulled like granite.
“A little camo-paint and spit. Or boot-wax. Takes the shine right off.”
“Right.” Vadim peered more closely at Milo’s pin. “What are these rough
edges here? On either side? Like something’s been snapped off.”
“The skull was backed by three daggers originally. One for each of the
original founded regiments. The Tanith First the Tanith Second and the Tanith
Third. Only the Tanith First made it off the home world.”
Vadim had heard the story secondhand a few times, but he had never
plucked up the nerve to ask a Tanith about it directly. In honour of his service
to Warmaster Macaroth’s predecessor, Gaunt had been given personal
command of the Tanith forces. That in itself was unusual, a commissar in
command. Commissars were political officers. It explained why Gaunt’s
official rank was colonel-commissar.
On Tanith, about six years earlier, on the very day of the Founding, the
legions of the archenemy had swept in. Tanith was lost, there was no
question. For Gaunt there had been a choice: stay and die with every man, or
withdraw with what strengths he could save to fight another day. He had
chosen the latter, and escaped with only the men of the Tanith First. The
Tanith First-and-Only. Gaunt’s Ghosts.
Many of the Ghosts had hated Gaunt for that for cheating them out of the
chance to fight for their world. Some, like Major Rawne, still did. But the
last few years had shown the wisdom of Gaunt’s decision. Gaunt’s Ghosts
had chalked up a string of battlefield victories that had significantly helped
the Crusade endeavour. He’d made them count which made sense of saving
them.
And at Vervunhive, perhaps Gaunt’s most lauded victory so far, the Ghosts
had benefited from new blood. The Verghastite recruits: scratch company
guerillas, ex-hive soldiery, dispossessed civilians, all given the chance to
join by Warmaster Macaroth as a mark of respect for the shared defence of
the great hive.
“We snapped the side daggers off the crest,” said Milo. “We only needed
one piece of Tanith straight silver to remind us who we were.”
Vadim tossed the cap back to Milo. The billet room around them was a
smoky haze of men lolling in bunks or finessing kit. Domor and Brostin were
having a game of regicide. Nehn was playing a little box-pipe badly.
“How you finding the drills?” Milo asked Vadim.
“The drop stuff? It’s okay. Easy enough.”
“You think? We’ve done rope deployments before a few times, but not in
the dark. And they say the drop could be a long one. I hate heights.”
“I don’t notice them,” said Vadim. He’d taken a tin of boot-wax out of his
kitbag and was beginning to apply it to his pin as Milo had suggested.
“Why?”
Vadim grinned. He wasn’t much older than Milo, perhaps early twenties.
He had a strong nose and a generous mouth, and small, dark mischievous
eyes. “I was a roofer. I worked repairing the masts and plating on the Main
Spine. High level stuff, mostly without a harness. I guess I’m used to
heights.”
“Feth!” said Milo, slightly impressed. He’d seen Vervunhive Main Spine
himself. There were smaller mountains. “Any tips?”
“Yeah,” said Vadim. “Don’t look down.”
“Twenty-three hundred hours tomorrow night will be D-hour,” said Lord
General Barthol Van Voytz. He folded the fingers of his white-gloved hands
together, almost as if in prayer. “May the Emperor protect us all. Field
muster begins at twenty thirty, by which time, given advance meteorology, the
drogues should be manoeuvring into the dispersal field. I want drop-ships
and support air-ready by twenty-one thirty, when mount up commences. First
wave launch is at twenty-two hundred, with second wave ten minutes after
that and third wave at twenty-two thirty.”
He glanced around the wide, underlit chart table at his officers.
“Questions?”
There were none, not immediately anyway. Gaunt, two places to Van
Voytz’s left, leafed through his copy of the assault orders. Outside the forcedome
surrounding the briefing session, the bridge crew of the mighty drogue
manned their stations and paced the polished hardwood decks.
“Let’s remind ourselves what’s on offer,” said the lord general, nodding to
his adjutant. Like the lord general, the aide was dressed in a crisp, emerald
green Navy dress uniform with spotless white gloves. Each gold aquila
button on his chest twinkled like a star in the soft, white illumination. The
adjutant pressed a button on a control wand, and a three dimensional
hololithic view of Cirenholm rose from the chart table’s glass top.
Gaunt had been over the plans a hundred times, but he still took the
opportunity to study this relief image. Cirenholm, like all the habitations still
viable on Phantine, was built into the peaks of a mountain range that rose
dramatically above the lethal atmospheric oceans of pollution covering the
planet. It had three main domes, the two largest nestled together and the third,
smaller, adjoining at an angle on a secondary peak. The domes were fat and
shallow, like the lids of forest mushrooms. Their skirts projected out over the
sides of the almost vertical mountains. The apex of each dome was spined
with a cluster of masts and aerials, and a thicket of flues, smoke-stacks and
heat exchangers bloomed from a bulge in the upper western slopes of the
secondary dome. It had a population of two hundred and three thousand.
“Cirenholm is not a fortress,” said Van Voytz. “None of the cities on
Phantine are. It was not built to withstand a war. If it was simply a matter of
crashing the enemy here, we’d be doing it from orbit, and not wasting the
time of the Imperial Guard. But… and I think this is worthy of repetition…
our mission here is to recapture the vapour mills. To drive out the enemy and
reclaim the processors. The Crusade desperately needs the fuel-gases and
liquid chemicals this world produces.”
Van Voytz cleared his throat. “So we are forced into an infantry assault.
And in infantry terms, Cirenholm is a fortress. Docking and hangar facilities
are under the lips of the domes and well protected, so there is no viable
landing zone. That means cable drops.”
He took out a hard-light pointer and indicated the narrow decks that ran
around the rim of the domes. “Here. Here. And here. These are the only
viable drop zones. They look small, I know. In reality, they’re about thirty
metres broad. But that will look small to any man coming out of a drop ship
on an arrestor hook. The last thing we need tomorrow night is inaccuracy.”
“Can I ask, sir, why tomorrow has been chosen as a go?” The question
came from Captain Ban Daur, the Verghastite fourth officer of the Tanith
regiment. Gaunt had brought him along as his aide. Corbec and Rawne were
busy readying the men and Daur, Gaunt knew, had a cool head for strategy
and soaked up tactics like a sponge.
Van Voytz deferred to the person on his immediate left, a short, fidgeting
man dressed in the black leather and red braid of the Imperial Tacticians
cadre. His name was Biota. “Long range scans indicate that weather
conditions will be optimal tomorrow night, captain,” said Biota. “Low
cloud, and no moonlight. There will be a crosswind from the east but that
should keep the cloud cover behind us and shouldn’t pick up. We’re unlikely
to get better conditions for another week.”
Daur nodded. Gaunt knew what he was thinking. They could all do with a
few more days’ practice.
“Besides,” said the lord general, “I don’t want to keep the drogues out in
open sky any longer than I have to. We’re inviting attack from the enemy’s
cloud-fighters.”
Admiral Ornoff, the drogue commander, nodded. “Every day we wait
multiplies the chance of interception.”
“We have increased escort patrols, sir,” objected Commander Jagdea. A
small woman with close-cropped black hair, Jagdea was the chief officer of
the Phantine Fighter Corps. Her aviators had been providing protection since
the drogues set out, and they would lead the raid in.
“Noted, commander,” said Van Voytz. “And we are thankful for the efforts
of your flight officers and ground crews. However, I don’t want to push our
luck.”
“What sort of numbers do the enemy have at Cirenholm?” Gaunt asked
quietly.
“We estimate between four and seven thousand, colonel-commissar,” said
Biota. “Mostly light infantry from the Blood Part, with close support.”
“What about loxatl?” Daur asked.
“We don’t think so,” said the tactician.
Gaunt noted the number down. It was vague, and he didn’t like that. The
Blood Part was the backbone of the Chaos forces in this sub-sector, the
personal retinue of the infamous warlord Urlock Gaur.
They were good, so the reports said. The Ghosts had yet to face them.
Most of the opposition the Tanith had met so far had been extreme fanatics.
The Infardi, the Zoicans, the Shriven, the Kith. Chaos zealots, demented by
their foul beliefs, who had taken up weapons. But the Blood Part was
composed of soldiers, a fraternal military cult, every one of them sworn to
Gaur’s service in a grisly ritual that involved cutting their palms against the
jagged edges of his ancient Space Marine armour.
They were well-drilled, obedient efficient by Chaos standards, blindly
devoted to both their dark daemon-gods and their twisted warrior creed. The
Blood Pact elements on Phantine were said to be commanded by Sagittar
Slaith, one of Urlock Gaur’s most trusted lieutenants.
The loxatl were something else. Xenos mercenaries, an alien breed coopted
by the arch-enemy as shock troops. Their murderous battle lust was
fast becoming legendary. Or at least the meat of barrack room horror stories.
“As you have read in your assault orders, the first wave will strike at the
primary dome. That’s you and your men, Colonel Zhyte.”
Zhyte, an ill-tempered brute on the other side of the table, nodded. He was
the field commander of the Seventh Urdeshi Storm-troop, a regiment of nine
thousand men. He wore the black and white puzzle-camo of his unit like he
meant it. The Urdeshi were the main strength of the Imperial war on Phantine,
if only numerically, and Gaunt knew it. Numbering little more than three
thousand, his Ghosts were very much light support.
Urdesh, the famous forge world, had fallen to the archenemy several years
before. Gaunt’s men had already fought the products of the captured weapon
shops and tank factories on Hagia. The Urdeshi regiments, eight of them,
were famously good shock troops, and, like the Tanith, were dispossessed.
The difference was that the Urdeshi still had a home world to win back.
Even now, the Urdeshi Sixth, Fourth Light and Tenth were engaged upon
the liberation of their world. Zhyte’s filthy demeanor was probably down to
the fact he wished he and his men were all there, instead of here, fighting to
free up some stinking vapour mills.
Still, Gaunt wished his men had been given the main assault. He felt in his
bones they’d do it better.
“Second wave goes here. The secondary dome. That’s your Tanith, Gaunt.
The secondary dome houses Cirenholm’s vapour mill, but ironically, that’s
not your primary objective. It goes against what I said earlier, I know, but we
need to secure Cirenholm as a staging position. It’s vital. Our real trophy
will be Ouranberg, and we don’t have a hope of taking that unless we have a
base in this hemisphere to operate out of. Cirenholm is the doorway to
victory on Phantine, my friends. A stepping stone to triumph.”
Van Voytz pointed his stick towards the smallest dome. “Third wave takes
the tertiary dome. Major Fazalur’s Phantine Skyborne will lead that one in,
supported by Urdeshi storm-troops.”
Fazalur, next to Gaunt, smiled at last. He was a weathered man with
shaven hair. He wore the quilted cream tunic of the local army. Gaunt was
aware of the terrible loyalties being stretched in this force-screened room.
Zhyte, longing to be in a war elsewhere, a war that actually mattered to him
and his men. Daur — and Gaunt himself — wishing the Ghosts weren’t going
in so underprepared. Fazalur, yearning for his men to have the honour of
leading the liberation of his own fething world. But the Phantine Skyborne
numbered less than six hundred. No matter how brave or driven, they would
have to allow others to win back their high cities for them.
“Any other comments?” asked the lord general.
There was an uneasy pause. Gaunt knew that at least three men around that
table ached to unburden themselves and complain.
No one spoke.
“Right,” said the lord general. He waved to his aide. “Let’s collapse the
force screen now and bring in some refreshments. I think we should all drink
to D-hour.”
The drinks after the briefing had been intended to be convivial, to break the
ice between commanders who knew little about one another. But it had been
stiff and awkward.
Turning down the lord general’s vintage amasec, Gaunt had withdrawn
early, walking down the hardwood floor of the bridge deck and up a
screwstair onto the drogue’s forward observation deck.
He stood on a metal grille suspended by tension hawsers inside an
inverted dome of armoured glass. Outside, the endless skies of Phantine
boiled and frothed. He looked down. There was no land to see. Only
millions of square kilometres of dimpled, stained cloud.
There were fast moving ribbons of pearly sculpture, dotting puffs of
yellow fleece, iridescent bars of almost silver gas. Murky darkness seeped
up through parts of the cloud, unwholesome twists of smog and venting
corruption. Far below, occasional flares of ignited gas blossomed in the
dense, repellent cloud.
Phantine had been an industrial world for fifteen centuries, and now it was
largely inhospitable to human kind. Unchecked resource mining and
rapacious petrochemical overproduction had ruined the surface and created a
lethal blanket of air pollution five kilometres deep.
Only the highest places remained. Spire-like mountains, or the uppermost
tips of long-dead hives. These spires and tips protruded from the corrosive
gas seas and formed remote islands where mankind might just continue the
habitation of the world its greed had killed. Places like Cirenholm and
Ouranberg.
And the only reason for those precarious habitations was so that mankind
could continue to plunder the chemical resources of Phantine Sliding under
the handrail, Gaunt sat down on the edge of the walkway so that his boots
were dangling. Craning out, he could just see back down the vast underbelly
of the drogue. The pleated gas sacks. The armoured canvas panels. They
glowed ochre in the unhealthy half-sun. He could see one of the huge engine
nacelles, its chopping propeller blades taller than a warlord titan.
“They said I’d find you up here, Ibram.”
Gaunt glanced up. Colonel Colm Corbec hunkered down next to him.
“What’s the word, Colm?” asked Gaunt, nodding to his second-incommand.
The big, thick-bearded man leaned against the handrail. His bared
forearms were like hams and decorated, under the hair, with blue spirals and
stars.
“So, what did Lord General Van Voytz have to say?” said Corbec. “And
what’s he like?” he added, sitting down next to Gaunt and letting his legs
swing off the grille.
“I was just wondering that. It’s hard to know, sometimes, what a
commander is like. Dravere and Sturm, well, they don’t fething count.
Bastards, the both of them. But Bulledin and Slaydo… they were both fine
men. I always resented the fact Lugo replaced Bulledin on Hagia.”
“Lugo,” growled Corbec. “Don’t get me started on him.”
Gaunt smiled. “He paid. Macaroth demoted him.”
“The Emperor protects,” grinned Corbec. He plucked a hip flask from his
trouser pocket, took a swig, and offered it to Gaunt.
Gaunt shook his head. He’d abstained from alcohol with an almost
puritanical conviction since the dark days on Hagia several months before.
There, he and his Ghosts had almost paid the price for Lord General Lugo’s
mistakes. Cornered and frustrated, and tormented by an over-keen sense of
responsibility invested in him by his mentors Slaydo and Oktar, Gaunt had
come closer to personal failure than at any time in his career. He’d drunk
hard, shamefully, and allowed his men to suffer. Only the grace of the
Emperor, and perhaps of the beati Saint Sabbat, had saved him. He’d fought
back, against the forces of Chaos and his own private daemons, and routed
the arch-enemy, driving back their forces just hours before Hagia could be
overrun.
Hagia had been spared, Lugo disgraced, and the Ghosts had survived, both
as an active unit and as living beings. There was no part of that hard path
Gaunt wanted to retrace.
Corbec sighed, took back the flask and sipped again. He missed the old
Gaunt the commander who would kick back and drink the night away with his
men as hard as he’d fight for them the next day. Corbec understood Gaunt’s
caution, and had no wish to see his beloved commander turned back into a
raging, drunken malcontent. But he missed the comradely Gaunt. There was a
distance between them now.
“So… this Van Voytz?”
“Van Voytz is a good man, I think. I’ve heard nothing but good reports
about him. I like his style of command—”
“I sense there’s a ‘but’, Ibram.”
Gaunt nodded. “He’s sending the Urdeshi in for first kill. I don’t think their
hearts are in it. He should trust me. And you. The Ghosts, I mean.”
“Maybe he’s on our side for once.”
“Maybe.”
“Like you said, it’s often hard to get the measure of your commander on
first sight.” Gaunt turned to look at Corbec. “Meaning?”
“Look at us.”
“Look at us, what?”
Corbec shrugged. “First time I saw you, I thought I’d been saddled with
the worst burn-boil of a commander in the Imperium.”
They both snorted with laughter.
“Of course, my planet was dying at the time,” said Corbec as their
amusement subsided. “Then it turned out you were—”
“What?”
“Okay.”
Gaunt toasted Corbec with an imaginary glass. “Thanks for that
underwhelming vote of confidence.”
Corbec stared at Gaunt, all the laughter gone from his eyes. “You’re the
best fething commander I’ve ever seen,” he said.
“Thanks, Colm,” said Gaunt.
“Hey…” said Corbec quietly. “Look, sir.”
Outside, the sun had come out and the noxious clouds had wafted away
from the ports. They looked out and saw the vast shape of the drogue
escorting them, a kilometre long dirigible painted silver on the belly and
white on the top. It had a ribbed, hardwood frame and extended out at the
front in a fluked ram the size of a giant nalwood. They could see the eight
motor nacelles along its belly beating the air with their huge props. Beyond
it, in the suddenly gleaming light, they could see the next drogue in formation.
Floating islands, armed and armoured, each carrying upwards of four
thousand men.
“Feth!” Corbec repeated. “Pinch me. Are we aboard one of them?”
“We are.”
“I knew it but it takes seeing it to know it, you know what I mean?”
“Yes.”
Gaunt looked up at Corbec. “Are we ready, Colm?”
“Not really. I’m not even going to tell you about the ammunition situation.
But… well, we’re as ready as we can be.”
“Then that’s good enough for me.”
DZ OR DEAD
CIRENHOLM, WEST CONTINENTAL
REACHES, PHANTINE
212 to 213.771, M41
“There was a lot of shouting, a lot of jostling, a lot of activity at first.
After that, everyone just went quiet. We knew what was coming. Then we
went in. Down the rope. Gak! Holy gak! That was a ride.”
—Jessi Banda, sniper, Tanith First
ONE
Night had fallen three hours before. Moonless, as Tactician Biota had
promised. A light easterly. The immense gloom outside was a profound
black, broken only, from far below, by the faint foam of polluted cloud bars
and lustrous mist.
The lumbering drogues, running dark with blackout shutters closed, blinds
drawn and rigging lights off, swung slowly around over a six hundred square
kilometre cloud bank designated as the dispersal field. They faced north.
They faced Cirenholm. It was twenty-one ten hours Imperial.
Commander Jagdea, dressed in a bulky green pressure suit her crimson
helmet on the deck at her feet finished up her final briefing, and clasped
hands with each of the Halo Flight personnel in turn. They had been grouped
around her in a huddle at the edge of drogue Nimbus’s secondary flight deck,
and now they rose from perches on jerry cans and cannon-shell pallets to
take her hand.
The secondary flight deck was brightly lit and throbbed with noise and
activity. Deck crews ran back and forth, releasing anchor lines, uncoupling
feeder hoses, and pushing empty munition carriages out of the way. Pressurepowered
drivers and ratchets wailed and stuttered as the last few plates and
panels were screwed into place. Ordnance teams moved down the chevron
of waiting warplanes, arming and blessing the wing-slung munitions. A group
of deck servitors followed the tech-magi, collecting up the priming pins, each
marked with a tag of yellow vellum, that the armourers left in their wake.
The six Marauder fighter-bombers of Halo Flight were set in a herringbone
pattern down the length of the deck in greasy locking cradles. Three
faced port, three faced starboard, all of them raked at a forty-five degree
angle from the rear.
The flight crews, half a dozen for each forty tonne beast ran down the
centre line of the deck and climbed into their designated aircraft.
A buzzer sounded, followed by a quick whoop of klaxons. Cycling amber
lights in a row down the centre ridge of the bay roof began flashing.
Jagdea scooped up her helmet and retreated to the far end of the deck,
behind an angled blast-board.
The main lighting went off abruptly, as the buzzer had warned. Lines of
low-power deck lights winked on, casting their feeble glow up through the
grille of the floor. Deck crew with light poles moved down the line, flagging
signals. Hatches and canopies began to close, techs leapt down and rolled
away the lightweight access stairs. The massive thrust-tunnel turbines, four
on each ship, began to turn over. A whine rose, shaking the deck.
Jagdea pulled on her vox-earpiece so she could listen in.
“Halo Two, at power.”
“Halo Four, check.”
“Halo Five, at power now.”
“Halo Three, power, aye.”
“Halo Six, at power.”
“Halo Leader, confirming I have power. Twenty seconds. Standby to
mark.”
The roar was bone-shaking now. Jagdea could feel every organ in her
torso vibrating. She loved that feeling.
“Control, Halo Leader. The word is Evangeline. Deck doors opening.”
“Halo Leader, control. I hear Evangeline. Praise be the Emperor. Flight
confirm.”
“Halo Two, the word Evangeline.”
“Halo Five, I hear it”
“Halo Six, aye, Evangeline.”
“Halo Three, Evangeline.”
“Halo Four, I hear Evangeline.”
“Halo Leader. Go with grace.”
The deck doors opened. Shutters peeled back along both sides of the deck,
and hydraulic doors yawned underneath the cradles. The tumultuous inrush of
high altitude wind and exterior prop noise drowned the engine roar.
“Control, Halo Leader. Execute.”
“Halo Leader. We have launch execute. Set to release cradles. Count off
from three. Three, two—”
There was a lurch, and a series of concussive bangs. The huge warplanes
tilted as their cradles tipped and disengaged, sliding them out of the deck
space, dropping them like stones. Three dropped out to port, the other three
to starboard. The huge drogue barely trembled as it released the weight.
They fell for a second into the blackness and then fired their engines,
belching thrust pulling hard G’s as they took lift and climbed away from the
airship.
The deck doors began to close. Jagdea took a last, wistful look at the
retreating specks of afterburner glow that twinkled out there in the dark, like
stars.
Another thirty minutes and it would be her turn.
Cirenholm was about fifty minutes’ flying time from the dispersal field at a
comfortable cruising speed, but Halo Flight were pushing their tolerances. In
a long, vee formation they burned north, gaining altitude in the lightless air.
A little turbulence. The airframes raided. On Halo Leader, Captain Viltry
made a miniscule adjustment and scribed a mark on his thigh pad chart with a
wax pencil. There were wind-whorls at this height. Counter-turning cones of
cold, super-fast air.
There was frost on his canopy, stained yellow by air pollutants, and his
limbs were stiff with altitude shock and air-burn.
He sucked hard on his mask.
To his side and just below, his navigator Gammil was hunched over his
station, studying the hololithic charts by the light of a hooded spodamp.
“Turn two two zero seven,” Gammil voxed.
“Halo Leader, Halo Flight. Turn two two zero seven. Make your height
forty-four fifty.”
Viltry’s sensors showed the first hard returns of the Cirenholm promontory.
Nothing by eye.
“Halo Leader, Halo Flight. Make ready.”
Viltry noted with satisfaction the ten green lights that flashed live on his
munition screen. Serrikin, his payload officer, had done his job perfectly.
“Two minutes,” Viltry announced.
Another patch of turbulence. Harder. The cabin shook. The glass on a dial
cracked. “Steady. One minute twenty.”
Viltry kept glancing at the locator. An enemy cloud-fighter now would be
disastrous. “Forty seconds.”
Something blurry crept across the sweeping display. An interceptor? Pray
to the God-Emperor it was just a falling ice-cloud, echoing on their sensor
patterns.
“Halo Two, Halo Leader. West quadrant. Nine by nine by six.”
“I see it Halo Two. Just an ice-cloud. Twenty seconds.” The Marauder
bucked again, violently. The bulb in Gammil’s spotlamp burst and the cabin
below Viltry went dark.
He saw the snowy pleats of the filth clouds below, violet in the night. He
made the sign of the aquila. He thumbed back the safety covers on the ten
release switches.
“At ten seconds! Ten, nine, eight seven…”
Halo Flight banked a tad, holding pattern.
“…three, two, one… drop! Drop! Drop!”
Viltry threw the release switches. His Marauder rose with a lurch as it
loosed the weight. He nursed it back.
Halo Flight banked away west, turning and reforming for the run back to
the drogue.
Behind them, colossal clouds of feathery nickel filaments bloomed out in
the air, blinding the already half-blind sensors of Cirenholm.
The muster-deck of the Nimbus, lit a cold, merciless white, was thronging
with Ghosts. They were arranged by squad in rows marked by pew-like
benches. It was twenty-one twenty-five hours.
Ibram Gaunt entered the muster hall and walked down the rows, chatting
and exchanging pleasantries with the men. He was dressed for the drop in a
hip-length, fur collared leather jacket, his cap still on. His bolt pistol was
bolstered under his left armpit in a buckled rig, and his power sword, the
trophy weapon of House Sondar, was webbed across his back. He already
wore his drop-harness, the heavy arrester hook banging against his thigh.
The Tanith seemed ready. They looked fine. No one had the nervous look
Gaunt always watched for.
Each Ghost was prepping up, and then turning to let his neighbour in the
squad double-check his harness and couplings. They were all buttoned up
and beginning to sweat. Lasguns were cinched tight across their chests.
Gloves were going on. Each trooper had a balaclava and a rubberised gashood
ready to pull on, his beret tucked away. Camo-cloaks were rolled like
bedding into a tight tube across the backside.
Gaunt saw Obel checking Bragg down.
“How’s the arm, Try?” asked Gaunt.
“Good enough to fight with, sir.”
“You can manage that?” Gaunt indicated the autocannon and tripod that
Bragg was to carry down the rope. Support weapon troopers and voxofficers
would have the hardest time tonight.
“No problem, sir.”
“Good.”
Caill was Bragg’s ammo-humper. He had drum magazines strung over both
shoulders. “Keep him fed, Caill.”
“I will, sir.”
On the far side of the chamber, Gaunt saw Scout Sergeant Mkoll closing
his final briefing with the Tanith scouts, the regiment’s elite troopers. He
made his way over, passing Doc Dorden and Surgeon Ana Curth, who were
inoculating every trooper in turn with altitude sickness shots —
acetazolamide, their systems more than used to it since the Holy Depths of
Hagia — together with counter-toxin boosters and an anti airsickness drug.
Dorden was tossing spent drug vials into a plastic tray “You had a shot yet,
colonel?” he asked Gaunt, fitting a fresh glass bulb into the metal frame of his
pneumatic needle.
Deliberately, Gaunt hadn’t. The venerable doctor had visited him in his
cabin half an hour earlier to administer the shot, but Gaunt considered it more
appropriate for him to be seen taking it in front of the men.
Dorden was just acting out his prearranged part.
Gaunt peeled off his glove and hauled back his sleeve.
Dorden fired the delivery spike into the meat of Gaunt’s exposed forearm
and then swabbed the blood-welling dot with a twist of gauze. Gaunt made
sure he didn’t flinch.
“Any shirkers?” he whispered to Dorden as he slid his sleeve back down.
“A few. They’ll bayonet anything, but the sight of a needle—” Gaunt
laughed.
“Keep it going. Time’s against us.”
Gaunt nodded to Curth as he moved on. Like Dorden, she wouldn’t be
making the drop. Instead, she’d have the unenviable task of waiting in the
Nimbus’s empty, silent infirmary for the wounded to roll in.
“The Emperor protect you, Colonel-Commissar,” she said.
“Thank you, Ana. Let him guide your work when the time comes.”
Gaunt liked Curth, and not because she was one of the most attractive
things in the regiment. She was good. Damn good. Fething good, as Corbec
might say.
And she’d left a rewarding life in Vervunhive to tend the Tanith First.
Delayed slightly by goodwill exchanges for troopers like Domor, Derin,
Tarnash and the stalwart flame-trooper Brostin, Gaunt finally reached the
gathering of scouts.
They stood around Sergeant Mkoll in an impassive circle. Bonin,
Mkvenner, Doyl, Caober, Baen, Hwlan, Mkeller, Vahgnar, Leyr and the
others. Not necessarily the best fighters in the regiment but the reason for its
reputation. Stealth. Special operations. And, so far, all Tanith-born. No
Verghastite recruit had yet displayed enough raw ability to join Mkoll’s elite
scouts. Only a few, Cuu amongst them, had shown any real potential.
Gaunt stepped in amongst them and they all drew to salute. He waved them
down with a smile.
“Stand easy. I’m sure I’m just repeating what Mkoll has told you, but I
have a gut feeling this will be down to you. The lord general, and the other
regimental commanders, are looking at this like a nut to crack by force.
Wrong. I think it’s going to take smarts. This is city fighting. Cirenholm may
be stuck up on a fething mountain, but it’s a city nevertheless. You’ve got to
kill clever. Lead us in. Make the place ours. The lord general refused the
idea of giving anyone under command rank the city plans, but I’m breaking
that.”
Gaunt handed out tissue-thin copies of the schematics to the scouts.
“Feth knows why he doesn’t want you to see this. Probably doesn’t want
troopers acting with initiative over and above command. Well, I do. Here’s
the thing. This won’t be a fight where command can sit and shout orders. This
isn’t a battlefield. We’re going into a complex structure full of hostiles. I
want it closed down and secured in the name of the God-Emperor as fast as
possible. That means on-the-hoof guidance. That means scouting and recon.
That means decision making on the ground. When we’ve won the day, burn
those maps. Eat them. Wipe your arses with them and flush them away. Tell
the lord general, if he asks, you got lucky.”
Gaunt paused. He looked round, took them eye by eye. They returned his
look.
“I don’t believe in luck. Well… I do, as it goes. But I don’t count on it. I
believe in tight combat practice and intelligent war. I believe we make our
own luck in this heathen galaxy. And I believe that means using you men to
the limit. If any of you… I mean, any of you… voxes an order or instruction,
I’ll make sure it’s followed. The squad leaders and commanders know that.
Rawne, Daur and Corbec know that. What we take tonight, we take the Ghost
way. The Tanith way. And you are the fething brains of that way.”
He paused again. “Any questions?”
The scouts shook their heads.
“Give them hell,” said Gaunt.
The scouts saluted and strode off to join their squads. Gaunt and Mkoll
shook hands. “You’re first in,” said Gaunt. “Seems as if I am.”
“Do this for Tanith.”
“Oh, count on it,” Mkoll said.
Alert lights were coming on. A buzzer sounded. The Ghosts, squad by squad,
rose up and began to file out into the departure bay. A last few shouts and
good lucks bounced between drop-teams.
Gaunt saw Trooper Caffran break ranks for a second to kiss the mouth of
the Verghastite Tona Criid. She broke the kiss and slapped him away with a
laugh. They were heading for separate drop-ships.
He saw Brostin helping Neskon to sit his flamer tanks just right over his
back.
He saw Troopers Lillo and Indrimmo leading the Vervunhivers in one last
hive war-chant.
He saw Rawne and Feygor marching their detail through the boarding gate.
He saw Kolea and Varl, each at the head of his own squad, exchanging
boasts and dares as they filed to their designated ships.
He saw Seena and Arilla, the gun-girls from Verghast, carrying the light
support stubber between them.
He saw the snipers: Larkin, Nessa, Banda, Rilke, Ment… each one marked
out amid the slowly moving files by the awkwardly bagged long-lasrifles
they carried.
He saw Colm Corbec on the far side of the muster room, clapping his
hands above his bearded head and raising up a battle anthem.
He saw Captain Daur, joining in with the singing as he rushed to pull on
his balaclava. Daur left his cap on one of the vacant benches.
He saw them all: Lillo, Garond, Vulli, Mkfeyd, Cocoer, Sergeant Theiss,
Mkteeg, Dremmond, Sergeant Haller, laughing and singing, Sergeant Bray,
Sergeant Ewler, Unkin, Wheln, Guheen, Raess… all of them.
He saw Milo, far away through a sea of faces.
They nodded to each other. That was all that was needed.
He saw Sergeant Burone running back for the gloves he had forgotten.
He saw Trooper Cuu.
The cold, cat eyes.
Ibram Gaunt had always believed that it was a commander’s duty to pray
for all his men to return safely.
Not Cuu. If Cuu fell at Cirenholm, Gaunt thought, God-Emperor forgive
me, I won’t mourn.
Gaunt took off his cap and pushed it into his jacket. He turned to follow the
retreating files out of the muster bay. Passing the entrance of the Blessing
Chapel, he was almost knocked down by the shambling bulk of Agun Soric,
the old, valiant Verghast gang boss.
“Sir!”
“As you were, sergeant. Get to your men.”
“I’m sorry, sir. Just taking a last blessing.”
Gaunt smiled down at the short, thick-set man. Soric wore an eye-patch
and disdained augmetic work. He had been an ore-smeltery boss on Verghast,
and then a scratch squad leader. Soric had courage enough for an entire
company of men.
“Turn around,” said Gaunt, and Soric did so smartly. Gaunt patted down
Soric’s harness, and made a slight adjustment to the buckles of his webbing.
“Get going,” he said.
“Yes sir,” said Sonic, lurching away after the main teams. “Hold on there,”
said a dry, old voice from the Blessing Chapel. Gaunt turned.
Ayatani Zweil, wizened and white-bearded, hopped out beside him, and
put his hands either side of Gaunt’s face. “Not now, father—”
“Hush! Let me look in your eyes, tell you to kill or be killed, and make the
sign of the aquila at least.”
Gaunt smiled. The regiment had acquired Ayatani Zweil on Hagia, and he
had become their chaplain. He was imhava ayatani, a roving priest dedicated
to Saint Sabbat, in whose name and memory this entire crusade was being
fought. Gaunt didn’t really understand what made the old, white-bearded
priest tick, but he valued his company.
“The Emperor watch you, and the beati too,” said Zweil. “Don’t do
anything I wouldn’t do.”
“Apart from killing, slaughtering, engaging in firefights and generally
being a warrior, you mean?”
“Apart from all that, naturally.” Zweil smiled. “Go and do what you do.
And I’ll stay here and wait to do what I do. You realise my level of workload
depends upon your success or failure?”
“I’ve never thought of it that way, but thank you for putting it into such
perspective.”
“Gaunt?” the old, ragged priest’s voice suddenly dipped and became
stilled.
“What?”
“Trust Bonin.”
“What?”
“Don’t ‘What’ me. The saint herself, the beati, told me… you must trust
Bonin.”
“Alright. Thanks.”
The final siren was sounding. Gaunt patted the old priest’s arm and hurried
away to the departure bay.
The departure bay was the Nimbus’s primary flight deck. Down its immense,
echoing length lay drop-ships. Sixty drop-ships: heavy, trans-atmospheric
shuttles with a large door hatch in each flank. The deck crews were still
milling around them. Engines were test-starting. The previous day, each one
of the drop-ships had been wearing the colour pattern of the Phantine
Skyborne. Now each one was drabbed down with an anti-reflective pitch.
The Ghosts were mounting up.
Fifty drop-troopers were appointed to each transport, two squads of
twenty-five per ship. The squads mounted, in reverse order, via the hatch
they would eventually exit through. Staging officers held up metal poles with
stencilled number plates on the end so that the Ghosts could form up in the
right detail, at the right ship, and on the correct side for mounting.
There were still a few minutes to wait for some squads. They sat down on
the apron next to their appointed craft, daubing on camo-paint, making a last
few equipment checks or just sitting still, their minds far away. The point
men from each squad were checking, and in some cases, re-tying the jumpropes
secured above the hatch-doors. The ground crews had already done
this perfectly well, but the point men took their responsibilities for the ropes
very solemnly. If they and their comrades were going to depend on a knot for
their survival, it had better be one they had tied themselves.
It was twenty-one forty hours. By now, on two of the Nimbus’s sister
drogues, the Urdeshi storm-troops would already be aboard their drops.
Gaunt checked his chronometer again as he walked down the deck to his
drop-ship. Admiral Ornoff had just voxed down that the operation was still
running precisely to schedule, but there was a report that the cross wind had
picked up a little in the last thirty minutes. That would make transit rough and
roping out harder, and it would clear away more quickly the sensor-foxing
chaff that Halo Flight had spread earlier on.
Gaunt called in Hark, Rawne and Corbec for a final word.
All of them looked ready, though Rawne was eager to get to his flight Hark
was still very unhappy about the disastrous ammunition situation. After
rationing out all the size threes held by the regiment and scouring the
Munitorium stores of all the drogues, the Ghosts had a grand total of three
clips per trooper. Due to a mis-relayed order, the taskforce Munitoria had
stocked with size fives, the type used by both the Urdeshi and the Phantine.
There had not been time to send back to Hessenville for extras, and no way
of rearming the Tanith with alternative weapons.
“It could kill morale,” said Hark. “I’ve heard a lot of grumbling.”
“It may actually focus them,” said Corbec. “They know that more than
ever, they have to make everything count.”
Commissar Hark didn’t seem too convinced by the colonel’s take, but he
had not been with the regiment long enough to fully appreciate Colm
Corbec’s instinctive wisdom. Hark had been attached to them on Hagia,
essentially as the instrument of a command structure bent on bringing Gaunt
down. But Hark had redeemed himself, fighting valiantly alongside the
Ghosts at Bhavnager and the battle for the Shrinehold. Gaunt had kept him on
after that. With Gaunt’s leadership role split between command and
discipline, it was useful to have a dedicated commissar at his side.
A buzzer began sounding. Some of the men whooped.
“Let’s go, gentlemen,” said Gaunt.
It was twenty-two hundred. The first wave of drop-ships, carrying the mass
of the Urdeshi forces, spilled out of their drogues into the high altitude night.
Colonel Zhyte, aboard drop 1A, craned to look out of the thick-glassed
port. He could see little except the inky volume of the sky and the occasional
flare of thrusters from the drop-ships around him. The drogues were blacked
out and invisible. There had been a tense last few moments between final
boarding and launch as all lights on the landing deck shut down so that the
launch doors could be opened without giving away position. An uneasy
twilight, oppressive, ending only with the violent thump of gravity when the
drop-ships plunged away.
Zhyte moved forward into the cockpit, past the rows of his troopers sitting
in the craft’s main body. In the low-level green illumination, their faces
looked pale and ill.
In the cockpit, visibility was a little better. The lightless, limitless cold
ahead was punctuated by sudden and swift-passing curls of smoky cloud or
little darting wisps. Zhyte could see thirty or forty wavering, dull orange
glows spread out ahead and below: the engine glares of the drop-ship
formation.
The ship rattled and vibrated sporadically, and the pilot and his servitor
co-pilot murmured to each other over the vox. That crosswind was picking
up, and there was a hint of headwind now too.
“Over the DZ in forty-one minutes,” the pilot told Zhyte. The Urdeshi
colonel knew that estimate would creep if the headwind got any stronger. The
heavily laden drop-ships would be straining into it.
Zhyte studied the sensor plate, looking at the milky display of formation
ships, scared of seeing something else. If an enemy cloud-fighter lucked onto
them now, it would be a massacre.
Twenty-two ten Imperial. The exit doors of the drop-ships had been shut and
locked three minutes before. Everything was vibrating with the noise of the
massed transporter engines.
In drop-ship 2A, Gaunt took his seat a fold-down metal bracket at one end
of the row of men. Someone was muttering an Imperial prayer. Several of the
men were turning over aquila symbols in their shaking hands.
A curt voice spoke over the vox-link. Gaunt couldn’t make out what it said
over the roar, but he knew what it meant.
There was a gut-flipping lurch as they seemed to fall, and then a slamming
wall of gravity that threw them backwards.
They were in flight.
They were en route.
This was it.
Commander Jagdea pulled a hard left turn and her two wing-men swooped
with her. The three Lightnings of the Imperial Phantine Air Defence banked
sharply and swept in alongside the dispersal drogue Boreas.
Jagdea had eight three-wing flights in the air now, escorts for the
wallowing shoals of drop-ships lumbering and climbing away from the
stationary drogues.
Visibility was so bad she’d been flying by instruments alone, but now she
could see the twinkling burner flares of the troop transports, hundreds of
them glowing like coals against the boiling darkness below.
“Control, Umbra Leader,” she said into her vox. “I see a little spread in
the troop formations. Urge them to correct for the crosswind.”
“Acknowledged, Umbra Leader.”
Some of the drop-ships had wandered on release, driven by the gathering
turbulence. They were straggling out to the east.
Keep them tight or we’ll lose you, she willed.
Every few seconds, she scanned the dome of sky above for contacts. As
far as they knew, Cirenholm had no idea what was coming its way. But
enemy aircraft might blow that advantage at any moment.
Not while she was airborne, Jagdea decided.
Halo Flight had circled around to the west for the return loop to the drogue
hangars, following a wide arc to avoid crossing the massed, inbound
formations of drop-ships.
Captain Viltry adjusted the airspeed of his Marauder. They were running
into toxic smog banks, and nuggets of dirt were rattling off his hull armour.
There was a brief vox blurt.
“Halo Leader, say again.”
Viltry waited. He felt himself tense up.
“Halo Leader to Halo Flight, say again.”
A few answers came back, all of them confused.
“Halo Leader. Halo Flight double up your visual checking.”
“Halo Three, Halo Leader. Have you seen Halo Five?”
Viltry paused. He glanced down at Gammil, and his navigator checked the
scanner carefully before shaking his head.
Shit. “Halo Leader, Halo Five. Halo Five. Respond. Suken, where the hell
are you?”
White noise filled Viltry’s ears.
“Halo Leader, Halo Four. Can you see Suken from where you are?”
“Hold on, Halo Leader.” A long pause. “No sign, Halo Leader. Nothing on
the scope.” Where the hell had—
“Contact! Contact! Eight eight one and closing!” The shout came from
Halo Two.
Viltry jerked around, searching the darkness, frantic.
There was a flash to his port. He looked round in time to see a little chain
of tracer fire sinking away down into the clouds like a flock of birds.
There was another wordless fizzle of static and then an air-burst ignited in
the sky two hundred metres to Viltry’s starboard wing.
Something very bright and fast passed right in front of him.
“Halo Three’s gone! Halo Three’s gone!” he heard one of his gunners
yelling.
“Break, break, break!” he ordered. The world turned upside down and
Viltry was pressed back into his grav-seat by the force of the spinning dive.
He saw the dying fireball that had been Halo Three streaming away in the
headwind in bands of blue flame.
His control console lit up and alarms blared. Viltry realised he was target
locked. He cursed and flipped the Marauder over, hearing Gammil squeal in
pain as he was thrown headlong out of the navigator seat.
They were tumbling. The altimeter was spinning like a speeded up
chronometer. They were dropping fast, almost beyond the point of recovery.
Viltry hauled on the squad and fired the burners, slamming the Marauder
back up and out of its evasive plummet. He tore off his breather mask and
vomited as the extreme G forces pumped his guts empty.
His pounding ears suddenly became aware of a screaming on the vox-link.
Halo Four.
“He’s behind me! He’s on me! Holy God-Emperor, I can’t lose him! I can’t
—”
A wash of white fire blistered across the clouds behind them.
“Halo Leader to Control! Halo Leader to Control! Enemy raiders in the
dispersal field! I say again, enemy raiders in the dispersal field!”
The target lock alarm sang out again.
Halo Leader slammed forward so hard Viltry bit through his own lips. He
saw his blood spiralling away and spattering against the canopy as the
stricken Marauder went into a lengthways spin.
He could smell burning cabling and a cold, hard stink of high altitude air.
He leaned into the controls and levelled the warcraft out.
One of his engines was on fire. Over the vox, he could hear his aft gunner
wailing. He turned to look down at Gammil. The navigator was crawling
back to his seat.
“Get up! Get up!” Viltry barked.
“I’m trying.”
Viltry’s hands were slick with sweat inside his gloves. He looked up,
searching the sky, and saw the lancing shadow right on them.
“For god’s sake—” Gammil began, seeing it in the same instant.
White hot cannon shells sliced down through the cabin, mincing the
navigator and his station in a welter of steel splinters, blood and smoke. The
entire lower fuselage of Halo Leader sheared off, shredding into the freezing
night. Viltry saw Serrikin tumbling away in a cloud of debris, dropping into
the corrosive darkness far below.
The freezing air howled around him.
He reached for his ejector lever.
The canopy exploded.
TWO
Ana Curth washed her hands under the infirmary’s chrome faucet for the third
time in fifteen minutes and then dusted them with sterilising talc. She was
fidgety, restless.
The infirmary hall was a quiet vault, well-lit and ranged with rows of
freshly laundered beds.
Curth checked a few drug bottles on the dispensary cart, then sighed and
walked down the length of the bay. Her boots rang out cold, empty beats and
her red surgical gown billowed out behind her like a lord palatine’s cape.
“You’ll drive yourself mad,” said Dorden.
The Tanith chief medic was lying serenely on his back on one of the beds,
staring at the ceiling. Swathed in green scrubs, he lay on top of the wellmade
sheets so as not to disturb them.
“Mad?”
“Raving. The waiting quite addles the mind.”
Curth paused at the end of the bed Dorden occupied.
“And this is how you deal with it?”
He tilted up his head and looked down the length of his body at her.
“Yes. I meditate. I consider. I ruminate. I serve the God-Emperor, but I’m
damned if I’ll waste my life waiting to be of service.”
“You recommend this?”
“Absolutely.”
Curth hesitatingly laid herself out on the bed next to Dorden. She stared at
the ceiling, her heels together, her arms by her side.
“This isn’t making me much calmer,” she admitted.
“Patience and you might learn something.”
“Like what?”
“Like… there are five hundred and twenty hexagonal divisions in the
pattern of the ceiling.”
Curth sat up. “What?”
“There are five hundred—”
“Okay, I got that. If counting roof tiles does it for you, I’m happy. Me I
have to pace.”
“Pace away, Ana.”
She walked away down the length of the bay. At the stern door, the
regiment’s medicae troopers Lesp, Chayker and Foskin were grouped outside
the plastic door screen, smoking lho-sticks.
“Can I cadge one?” she asked, joining them. Lesp raised his eyebrows and
offered her one. She lit up.
“They’ll be almost there by now,” Chayker reflected. “Right at the DZ.”
Lesp looked at his wristwatch. “Yup. Right about now.”
“Emperor help them,” Curth murmured, drawing on her lho-stick. Now
she’d have to wash her hands again.
Twenty-three six Imperial. Not a bad delay. The pilot of drop 1A listened to
his co-seat for a moment over the headset and then turned to give Zhyte a nod.
“Three minutes.”
The Urdeshi commander could still see nothing out of the front ports
except vague cloud banks and the light-fizz of other drop-ships surging their
engines. The headwind was climbing.
But Zhyte trusted his flight crew.
He moved back into the carrier hold and threw the switch that lit the amber
light over the hatch. Make ready.
The men got to their feet in the blue gloom, nursing out the slack on their
arrestor hook cords and pulling on their gas-hoods. Zhyte took his own gashood
out of its pouch, shook it out and fitted it over his head, adjusting it so
the plastic eyeslits sat squarely and the cap didn’t foul his vox-set He
squeezed shut the popper studs that anchored its skirts to his shoulders and
zipped the seal.
Now he was more blind than ever, shrouded in a treated canvas cone that
stifled him and amplified the sounds of his own breathing.
“Count off,” he announced into his vox.
The men replied quickly and efficiently by squad order, announcing their
number and confirming that their hoods were in place. Zhyte waited until the
last few had fastened up the seals.
“Hatches to release.”
“Release, aye!” the point men crackled back over the link.
There was a judder and a lurch as the side hatches were slid open and the
craft’s trim altered. Air temperature in the carrier bay dropped sharply, and
the light took on an ochre tinge.
“Ready the ropes! Ninety seconds!”
The point men were silhouettes against the gloomy yellow squares of the
open hatches, their battledress tugged by the slipstream.
Zhyte took out his bolt pistol, held it up clumsily in front of his face plate
to check it, and put it back in his holster. Almost there.
The hard snap of the inflator jerked Captain Viltry back into consciousness.
His head swam, and his body felt curiously weightless. He had no idea
where he was.
He tried to remember. He tried to work out what the hell he was doing. It
was cold and everything was pitch dark. Drunkenly, his neck sore, he looked
up and saw the faint shape of the inflator’s spherical sac, from which he
hung.
He’d ejected. Now he remembered. God-Emperor, something had taken
his bird apart… and his wing men too. He looked around hoping to catch a
glimpse of another aircraft. But there was just the high altitude void, the filmy
cloud, the curling darkness.
He checked his altimeter, the one sewn into the cuff of his flight suit. He
was a good two thousand metres below operational altitude, almost at the
envelope of the toxic atmospheric layer. His inflator must have fired
automatically, the pressure switch triggered by his fall.
The safety harness was biting into his armpits and chest. He tried to ease it
and realised he was injured. His shoulder was cut, and some of the harness
straps were severed. He was lucky to still be wearing the rig.
Parachutes were pointless on Phantine. There was nowhere to drop to
except corrosive death in the low altitude depths, the Scald, as it was known.
Flyers wore bailing rigs that inflated globular blimps from gas bottles that
would, unpunctured, keep them drifting above the lethal atmospheric levels
of the Scald until rescue.
Viltry was an experienced flyer, but he didn’t need that experience to tell
him the coriolis winds, savage at this height, had already carried him far
away from the flight paths. He tried to read the gauge on his air tanks, but he
couldn’t make the dial out.
Windwaste, he thought. That was him. Windwaste, the worst fate any
combat pilot on Phantine could suffer. Drifting away, alive, beyond the
possibility of recovery. Flyer lore said that men caught in that doom used
their small arms to puncture their inflators so that they could have a quick
death in the Scald’s poison acid-gases below.
But there was still a chance he’d get picked up. All he had to do was
activate his distress beacon. A toggle pull would do it.
Viltry hesitated. That simple toggle pull might bring him rescue, but it
would also be heard by the enemy at Cirenholm.
They’d know that a flyer was in distress. And therefore that at least one
Imperial aircraft was up tonight.
He didn’t dare. Ornoff had told the pilot fold that surprise was the key to
storming Cirenholm. Short range ship-to-ship vox chatter was safe, but
powerful, ranged transmissions like the amplified vox-blink of his distress
beacon might rain that surprise. Alert the enemy. Kill thousands of Imperial
Guardsmen.
Viltry drifted through the cold air desert, through the dark. Ice was forming
on the inside of his goggles.
He had to stay silent. Even though that meant he would be windwaste.
“Umbra Leader to flight, pickle off your tanks,” Jagdea said into her mask.
Umbra flight was threading the rear echelons of the troop ship formations.
They were almost over the DZ now. The raised bulk of Cirenholm was a
loud blur on her instruments.
The three Lightnings dumped their empty fuel tanks and rose above the
drop-ship flocks. They were running on internal tanks now, which meant they
had just another sixteen minutes of range left… less if they were called to
burn hard into combat.
Jagdea was jumpy. Halo Flight should have made the return ran by now,
but there had been no sighting of the overdue Marauder flight.
Commander Bree Jagdea had fifteen thousand hours of combat flight
experience. She was one of the best pilots ever to graduate from the
Hessenville Combat School. She had instinctive combat smarts that no
measure of training could ever teach. Those instincts took over now.
“Umbra Leader to Umbra Flight. Let’s nose ahead for one last burn. Chase
the Urdeshi formations. I’ve got a sick feeling there’s opposition aloft
tonight.”
“Understood, Umbra Leader.”
The trio of Imperial fighters swung west. Hundreds of lives were about to
be lost. But, running on instinct, Jagdea had just saved thousands more.
“Final prep,” said Sergeant Kolea, walking down the carrier hold of drop 2F
at the trailing edge of the Tanith formation.
“Three minutes to the DZ. I want hoods in place and hooks ready in thirty.
Door duty to active. Point men, stand by.”
The amber rune had not yet come on. Kolea strapped on his gas-hood, and
went down the line checking his Ghosts, one by one.
The side hatch of drop 2D was already open. Trooper Garond shivered in the
slip-stream blast, and made ready with the rope as Sergeant Obel gave the
signal. Outside, he could see cloud whipping past and several drop-ships
lying abeam, men crouched in their open hatches, ready and prepped.
Aboard drop 2B, Colm Corbec fitted his gas-hood and ordered the hatches
open. The squads took their positions, on their feet. Mkoll was at the head of
the second squad, ready to lead the scout fireteam in. Corbec nodded to him
and uttered a final prayer.
In drop 2K, Sergeant Ewler looked over at Sergeant Adare. The two squad
leaders shook hands.
“See you on the far side,” said Adare.
Viltry woke again and found his face and shoulder were beginning to burn
with the cold. He didn’t want to die like this. Not alone, discarded, like a
wind-blown seed. His numb fingers closed around the toggle.
He snatched his hand away and cursed his selfishness.
Unless…
If dispersal command-control heard his distress beacon, they’d know that
something had happened to Halo Flight. They’d realise there were hunters
loose.
He’d be warning them.
Filled with a sense of duty, Viltry pulled the toggle. It came away in his
hand. Shrapnel had ripped away the beacon’s trigger switch.
Suddenly, there was a creamy glow below them. Available light was
reflecting off the primary dome of Cirenholm in frosty midnight shine. The
drop-ship’s braking jets wailed so loud Zhyte could hear them through his
hood. They were stationary, as stationary as the headwind allowed, right
over the drop zone. Zhyte prayed they were low enough.
The green rune lit up.
“Deploy!” Zhyte growled.
There was a bright flash outside. Then another.
Shener, Zhyte’s starboard point man, looked out and saw the drop-ship
beside them splinter and fall apart, cascading luminous debris down into the
darkness.
“Interceptors!” he screamed into his link.
Another Urdeshi drop-ship suddenly became visible in the night as it
caught fire and burned down like a comet. A moment later, Cirenholm’s
defences woke up and lit the air with a ferocious cross-stitching of tracer
fire.
Shells whacked into drop 1A’s fuselage next to Shener. He had been
coiling out the rope. A terrible, exposed cold filled his legs and lower torso
and he looked down to see that there was an extraordinarily large, bloody
hole in his gut.
Shener toppled out of the hatch wordlessly and fell away into the gloom
below.
Zhyte reached the hatchway, battered by the wind. Shener was gone, and
the two men first up the squad had been exploded across the bay. There were
punctures in the hull.
Outside, a storm of enemy fire bloomed up at them.
Zhyte clipped his arrestor hook to the rope. He should have been last man
out but his point was gone and the troopers were milling, disorientated.
“Go!” yelled Zhyte. “Go! Go! Go!”
He leapt into space.
Drop 1C rocked as its neighbour exploded. Whinnying scraps of outflung
debris punched through the drop’s hull. Sergeant Gwill and three other
troopers were killed instantly. Corporal Gader, half-blinded in his hood,
suddenly realised he was in charge.
The green rune was on.
He ordered the men out.
Two thirds of the squads had exited when cannon shells ripped drop 1C
open. Gader was thrown out of the hatch.
He gestured tragically with his arrestor hook as he fell. But there was no
rope.
Gader dropped like a stone, right down the face of Cirenholm’s primary
dome, bouncing once off an aerial strut.
Drop 1K misjudged the headwind and came in too low, mashing against the
side of the dome in a seething blister of fire.
Just behind it drop 1N braked backwards in a flurry of jets and then
trembled as a rain of cannon shells peeled off its belly, spilling men out into
the darkness.
Drop 1M faltered, and tried to gain height. Its men were already deploying
out of the hatches. Sliding down the ropes, they discovered that the drop was
not only too high, it was also fifty metres short of the DZ. Each man in turn
came off the end of the dangling rope and fell away into the void.
The pilot of drop 1D saw the enemy cloud-fighter with perfect clarity as it
powered in, weapons flickering. He had no room to either pull up or bank.
His troops were already on the ropes and heading down. Drop 1D exploded
under the withering fire of the passing interceptor. Men were still hooked to
the ropes as they snapped and fell away from the detonation.
“Targets! Targets! Targets!” Jagdea urged as she swept down across the
Urdeshi troop ships. Drops were exploding all around, picked off by the
Phantom interceptors or hit by Cirenholm’s defence batteries.
The night had lit up. It was flickering hell here, beneath the vast dome of
Cirenholm’s primary hab.
Jagdea smoked in wide, avoiding a drop that blew apart in the air. She had
target lock on a spinning cloud-fighter and the guns squealed as she let rip.
It was turning so hard it evaded her fire, though her marching tracers
pummelled their way up the curve of the dome.
Jagdea inverted and, pulling two Gees, flipped round onto the cloudfighter’s
tail. It was heading out to pick off more of the vulnerable troop
ships in the van of the flock.
She jinked, lined it up, and hit the afterburner so that her streams of gunfire
would rake its length as she swept past it.
The enemy fighter became a fireball with wings, that arced away down
into the poisonous Scald below.
Jagdea banked around. Her wingmen were shouting in her headset.
Halo Two had just splashed an enemy interceptor, dogging it turn for turn
and chewing off its tail with sustained cannon fire. The stricken fighter tried
to end its death dive by ramming a drop, but it missed and trailed fire away
into the clouds.
Jagdea hung on her wingtip, and dropped, hunting visually and
instrumentally for targets. She powered down through the drop-ship fleet, her
target finder pinging ever more rapidly as she bottomed out and swung in on
the tail of a cloud-fighter that was flaring around to fire up at the bellies of
the troop ships.
Jagdea killed it with a fierce burst of fire.
She yawed to port, out-running the tail of the troop ship dispersal before
banking back to come in again beneath it. Her Lightning screwed over and
her instruments wailed as cannon shots battered into her flank.
Red runes on all systems. She’d been killed.
She peddled out, pulled back, and gave the dead craft all the lift its
wingspan would permit. She was now gliding towards the bulk of
Cirenholm, about to stall out.
Jagdea squeezed the weapon toggles on her yoke and emptied her
magazines into the dome, for what good it would do.
Her engines blew, and fire streamed along one wing.
She ejected.
Hell was reaching up to them with thousands of fingers made of fire. The
night was a strobing miasma of darkness and flashes. The wind was
screaming, a dull roar through the gas-hoods. Every few seconds, there was a
shell burst so bright the descending Urdeshi could see forever: the great
domed face of Cirenholm; the swarming drop-ships; the dangling strings of
men, hanging like fruit-heavy vines from the tightly packed ships.
Zhyte came off the rope end hard and slammed sideways into a balustrade.
It ran around the lip of the dome’s lowest outer promenade, and Zhyte
realised that a few metres to the left and he would have missed the city
structure entirely.
He’d cracked a rib on landing. He winced a few paces forward and
troopers thumped and rolled around him. The vox-lines were frenetic with
distorted chatter.
He tried to marshal his men and group them forward, but he’d never
known confusion like it. Bitter, hard fire rained down from an elevated
walkway twenty metres west, and dozens of his men were already sprawled
and twisted on what had once been a regal, upper class outer walk with
stratospheric views.
“Singis!” Zhyte yelled into his vox. “Move them in! Move them in!”
Singis, his young, cadet-school trained subaltern, ran past, trying to get the
men up. Zhyte saw a two-man stub-team attempting to erect their weapon,
hampered by the men who were dropping all around them and sometimes on
top of them. Indeed, there were so many men coming down now that the
immediate DZ was filling up. Penned in by the city wall, the edge of the
balustrade and the defending gunfire, they were rapidly filling up every
precious metre of the drop area. Deployed troopers were being knocked
down by the wave behind them. One man was pushed out over the balustrade,
and was only just clawed back by his desperate comrades.
Zhyte could feel the powerful downwash of the drop-ships as they came in
overhead, jostling for position.
The Urdeshi commander could see for about a kilometre along the length
of the curving promenade. All the way along, drop-ships were clustering and
roping out the strings of his puzzle-camoed troops. He saw a firefight around
a hatchway fifty metres away as his fifth platoon tried to storm entry. He saw
the flash of four grenades. He saw a drop-ship pummelled by tube-shot
rockets, saw it burn as it tilted sideways, tearing through the drop-ropes of
two other ships, cascading men to their deaths. As he watched, it exploded
internally and fell, glancing off the promenade with enough force to shake the
deck under his feet. A fireball now, it pitched sideways and fell off the city
shelf into the abyss.
A trooper to Zhyte’s left had lost his gas-hood in the descent. He was
choking and frothing, yellow blisters breaking the skin around his lips and
eyes.
Zhyte ran forward, ignoring the las-rounds exploding around him.
He got into cover behind a low wall with four of his squad’s troopers.
“We have to silence that position!” he rasped, indicating the elevated
walkway with a gloved hand. The man immediately right of him was
suddenly hit twice and went tumbling back. A second defence position had
opened up, raking 50-cal auto-cannon fire into the unprotected throng of the
landing troops.
They were dying. Dying so fast, Zhyte couldn’t believe what he was
seeing. They were packed in like cattle, without cover, with nowhere to
move to.
With a curse that came from somewhere deep in his guts, Zhyte ran into the
open towards the walkway. Tracer fire stippled the ground at his feet. He
hurled a grenade and the back blast knocked him down.
Two men grabbed him and dragged him into cover. The walkway was on
fire and sagging. Urdeshi troops poured forward from the dense, corralled
mob at the DZ.
“You’re a bloody maniac,” a trooper told him. Zhyte never did find out
who it was.
“We’re inside!” Singis voxed.
“Move up, by squad pairs!” Zhyte ordered. “Go!”
Ibram Gaunt was the first man out, the first onto the ropes. The secondary
dome of Cirenholm lay below. A huge fog of light and fire throbbed in the
night sky behind the silhouetted curve of the more massive primary dome.
The Urdeshi assault had been met with huge force.
Gaunt hit the DZ clean, and ran clear of the rope end as his men came
down. Las-fire was beginning to spit down at them from gun positions higher
up the dome slope. The Tanith were landing, as per instructions, on a wide
balcony that ran entirely around the widest part of the dome’s waist. Over the
vox came a curt report announcing that both Corbec and Mkoll’s squads were
on the balcony too, about a hundred metres away.
Troopers Caober and Wersun were right behind Gaunt. He waved them
wide to the right, to set up covering fire. He could see Sergeant Burone’s
drop-ship lining up ahead, hatches open as it came in over the balcony.
Through the stiff, treated canvas of his hood, he could feel the air resonate
with its whining thrusters.
“Hot contact!” the message buzzed over the vox. It was Sergeant Varl,
somewhere behind him. A lattice of laser fire lit up the night maybe two
hundred metres east, flickering along the balcony.
Gaunt saw figures ahead of him, armed men rushing out onto the balcony
shelf. They were shadows, but he knew they weren’t his own.
His bolt pistol barked.
“Move up!” he yelled. “Engage!”
Varl’s squad had come down into the middle of a firefight. Kolea’s unit was
dropping to their right, and Obel’s somewhere behind.
Varl scurried forward, popping off random shots with his rifle. The enemy
was secured around one of the major hatchways leading off the balcony walk
into the dome. They were in behind flakboard and sandbags.
The Tanith edged forward, using ornamental planters and windscreens as
cover, pumping fire at the entrance. Varl saw Ifvan and Jajjo scrambling up
onto a walkway and running to get good shooting positions.
He ducked in behind a potted fern that had long since been eaten away by
acid rain, and fired a sustained burst at a section of flakboard. Five other
troopers, also in cover, joined him and the emphatic fire they laid up between
them smashed the blast fence down. Bodies fell behind it.
“A flamer! I need a flamer!” Varl voxed. “Where the feth is Brostin?”
Half a kilometre east of Gaunt, Rawne’s assault units were dropping into the
worst resistance offered by the secondary dome. A dozen men were shot off
the ropes before they’d even reached the deck. Drop 2P had its belly shot out
by ground fire and limped away, dragging streamers of men behind it.
There were enemy forces out on the balcony itself, firing up at the troop
ships as they came over. And there were at least four multi-barrel autocannon
nests firing out of windows further up the dome’s surface.
Rawne paused in the hatchway of his ship.
“Sir?” Feygor asked, behind him.
“No fething way are we going down into that,” Rawne said sharply.
Vertical las-fire hissed past the hatch.
“Charges! Give me charges!” Rawne said, turning back inside.
Feygor moved down the waiting squad with an open musette bag, getting
every man to toss in one of his tube charges. When it was satisfyingly full, it
was passed back up the line to Rawne at the door.
“Pilot to squad leader! Why aren’t you going out? We can’t hold this
station for ever!”
“Feth you can! Do it!” Rawne growled back into the vox.
“I’ve got ships backing up behind him, and we’re sitting ducks!” the voice
on the vox complained.
“My heart bleeds,” replied Rawne, stripping the det-tape off one last
charge, dropping it into the bag and tossing it out. “Don’t make me come up
front and make your heart bleed too, you craven sack of crap.”
The satchel landed right in the midst of the ground troopers firing up from
the balcony. Rawne could see it clearly. When it went off, it spewed out a
doughnut shaped fireball that ripped fifty metres in every direction.
Rawne locked his arrestor hook to the rope.
“Now we go,” he said.
Drop 2K had come in too eagerly behind the troop ships halted by Rawne’s
delay. The pilot realised the flotilla ahead had cut to hover mode too late,
and had to yaw hard, breaking out of line. In the back of the drop, the waiting
lines of Ghosts were sent sprawling sideways. Trooper Nehn, crouching at
the open hatch as point man, was thrown out, but managed to hold on to the
rope. He was slammed back hard against the hull like a pendulum but
maintained his frantic grip though the breath had been smashed out of him.
2K’s pilot tried to avoid fouling the other ships and turned wide. Angry
and confused, the men in the drop bay had only just regained their feet when
the ship threw them over again.
They had dropped down into range of the dome defence, and taken two
missiles in the flank.
The drop was ablaze. Domor, the commanding officer, yelled at the men to
stay calm. Bonin and Milo were trying to drag Nehn back inside.
“We have to get down!” someone yelled.
“There’s nowhere to put down!” Domor replied.
“We’ve fething well overshot!” bawled Haller, the commander of 2K’s
other squad.
Domor grabbed a leather roof strap and hung on, his heavy musette bag,
cinched lasgun and arrestor hook banging and flapping against his body as the
drop wallowed and pitched. Trooper Guthrie was on the deck, blood leaking
down inside his hood from a scalp wound he’d received head-butting a seat
restraint on the first wild jolt.
“Medic! Here!” Domor cried, and then clambered over the backs of
several sprawled men to reach the port hatch. Milo and Bonin had just
succeeded in dragging Nehn back inside.
Domor looked out. Their drop, spewing sheets of flame from somewhere
near the ventral line, was limping slowly forward up over the patched,
greasy roof plates of the secondary dome itself. They were already a good
three hundred metres past the DZ. Looking back, Domor saw the waves of
Tanith ships coming in, roping out into a spasming fuzz of light. Domor’s
vox-set was awash with radio traffic from the assaulting forces. He
recognised voices, coded deployments, call-signs. But it all sounded like it
was coming from men who were fading away into a distance, like a party he
was leaving too soon. The curve of the dome was chopping the
transmissions.
They had missed. They’d had their chance and they’d fethed it. There was
no going back, no reversing back through the deploying lines. They were
overshooting up and across the target city-dome itself.
Under such circumstances, standing orders applied and they were clear:
abort and pull out along 1:03:04 magnetic, and return to the base drogue.
That’s it, boys. Nice try, but no thanks. Go home and better luck next time.
But abort wasn’t an option. Domor craned out. They’d clearly damaged a
fuel-line, and that was on fire. And from the sway of the old, heavy drop, the
pilot had lost a good proportion of his attitude control.
They’d never make it back to the drogue. Not in a million years.
Even if there was a chance, and Domor was fething sure there wasn’t, a
pull-out at this height and crawl rate would glide them right over the dome’s
lip-guns as a nice, slow, fat, fire-marked target.
They were dead.
Varl ducked. Chunks of stone and scabs of plasteel spattered from the
archway above his head.
Down the hall, someone was the proud owner of a heavy autocannon.
They’d broken the rim defence and forced access into one of the main
hatches leading off the secondary dome’s balcony. His squad was the first
one inside, though from the sound of the vox-traffic, Rawne was making
headway further around the dome edge.
The hatch they’d fought their way in through gave onto a wide lobby
dressed with polished ashlar and set with angular, cosmetic pillars. The floor
was littered with brick chips and dust, and the bodies of the enemy dead.
Varl knew he was facing the troops of the notorious Blood Pact. He’d paid
special attention in the briefings. The Blood Pact weren’t enflamed zealots.
They were professional military, soldiers sworn to the badges of Chaos. He
could tell from the tight, well-orchestrated resistance alone that he was
dealing with trained warriors.
They were holding the lobby with textbook authority: light support
weapons blocking the main throughway, peppering the hatch opening with
measured, tight bursts.
Varl ran to the next pillar, and watched in dismay as gunfire chewed away
a good chunk of its stone facing.
Stone splinters sprayed from the damage. He pulled himself in.
“Brostin!” he voxed. The flamer had got them through the opening. If they
could move Brostin further forward into the lobby’s throat, they might take
the next mark.
Las-fire and solid rounds spat past him. Varl could see Brostin in cover
three pillars away.
Varl peered out and took a hit to his shoulder that toppled him back. He
writhed back into cover, patting out the smouldering hole in his uniform. His
augmetic shoulder, heavy and metallic, had absorbed the shot.
“Nine, six!”
“Six, nine!” Kolea voxed back.
“Where are you, nine?” Damn these gas-hoods! Varl couldn’t see a fething
thing.
“Behind you, on the other side,” Kolea returned. Crouching around, Varl
could see the big Verghastite, ducked down behind a pillar on the right, with
two other men from his squad.
Cannonfire pounded down the hallway, filling the air with dust and flying
chips. Despite his hood, Varl could hear the clinking rain of spent cases the
enemy gun was spilling out onto the marble deck. Varl slid round onto his
knees and started to prep a tube charge.
There was a sudden increase in resistance fire, and the flooring between
the pillar rows was speckled with the ugly mini-craters of heavy fire. Varl
looked up and saw, to his disbelief, that Kolea had successfully run forward
into the maw of the enemy, and was now two pillars ahead of him on the
other side. Kolea stood with his back to the chipped, punished pillar and
lobbed a grenade out over his shoulder.
The blast welled flame down towards them. Varl sprang up and ran
through the smoke, dropping down behind a pillar ahead of Kolea. Seeing
him, Kolea swung out and drew level, then moved one ahead.
It was like some stupid fething competition, like the brainless games of
devil-dare Varl had played as a teenager. There was no skill in this. No
tactics, no battle-smarts. It was just sheer balls. Running into gunfire,
damning the bullets, shaming the devil and taunting him. They were edging
ahead simply by dint of bravado, simply through luck that neither of them had
been hit.
Kolea looked back at Varl.
Devil-dare. Bullet, whickered all around.
Varl ran out, sidestepped a tight burst and then pushed his already threadthin
luck further in order to dive behind the next pillar up. He could feel it
vibrate against his back as cannonfire punched into the far side.
Devil-dare. Devil-fething-dare. But enough was enough. The Emperor,
may he be ever vigilant, had smiled on them this far, but that was it. Another
step would be suicide. Varl knew luck was a soldier’s friend. It’d suck by
you, but it was fickle, and it hated being asked for favours.
“Nine, six. Stay in cover. I think I—”
Autocannon shots barked out and chewed the wall. Kolea had just made a
mad dash down the wall-side of the pillars on his half of the lobby and slid
in safe behind a pillar ten metres further forward.
“Nine!”
“Six?”
“You’re a mad fething fool!”
“It’s working, isn’t it?”
“But it shouldn’t be working and it won’t keep working if we do it again!”
“Cold feet, Tanith?”
“Feth you, Kolea!”
Of all the Ghosts, Varl and Kolea epitomised the best aspects of the
Tanith/Verghastite rivalry. There were a good few from both backgrounds
who manifested the uglier resentments, prejudices or simple racial enmities
that made up the worst. Sergeant Varl and Sergeant Kolea had been friends
from an early stage, but their friendship was catalysed in rivalry. Each was a
notable soldier, popular with the men. Each enjoyed a good relationship with
Gaunt. And each was in charge of a section that was considered by all to be
fine, solid and second-string.
There was nothing formal about the distinction. It was just a given that a
handful of platoons formed the regimental elite: Mkoll’s scouts, Rawne’s
merciless band, Corbec’s dedicated unit, Bray’s tightly-drilled, tightlydisciplined
squad and the determined, courageous mob schooled by Soric.
They were the best, the “front five” as they were often called. Kolea and Varl
both yearned to elevate their own squads into that illustrious upper echelon.
It was all fine and dandy to be regarded as part of the solid, dependable
backbone. But it wasn’t enough for either of them.
In combat, that competition came out. It didn’t help that both had missed
the epic battle for the Shrinehold on Hagia. They had formed the rearguard
then, and done a fine job, but they had not been there to share the glory of the
big fight. To prove their worth.
And so now it came down to devil-dare. Stupid, dumb-ass devil-dare
games, urging fate and luck and all the other monsters of the cosmic
firmament to make one a hero-winner and the other a loser-corpse.
Varl had come up from the ranks. He had fought for his stripes, and not just
been given them due to his record as a scratch-company hero like Kolea.
But enough was enough.
“No more, nine! No more, you hear?”
“You’re breaking up on me, six,” Kolea voxed back.
“We need to get a flamer up, Kolea—”
“Do what you like… I’m going ahead—”
“Nine!”
Varl looked out from cover, and saw a fountain spray of las-fire and
tracers vomit down the hallway. He saw Kolea running forward, somehow,
impossibly, alive in the midst of it. He saw thousands of individual impacts
as soot and dust and mortar was smashed out of the bullet-holes in the floor,
the roof and the walls.
Kolea ran on. He’d lost his wife at Vervunhive and, he had believed, his
children too. Some cruel twitch of fate had allowed them to survive and to
end up in the care of the female trooper Tona Criid and her devoted Tanith
partner Caffran.
Cruel wasn’t the word. It was too cruel. It was beyond cruel. He’d only
discovered the fact on Hagia, and pain had sealed his mouth. Those kids —
Dalin and Yoncy — had been through so much, believing their parents lost
and gaining fine new ones in the form of Criid and Caffran, Kolea had
decided never to disturb their world again.
He had avoided them. He had stayed away. No one had ever found out the
truth, except for Surgeon Curth, in whom he had confided.
It was better that way. It freed him.
Freed him to fight and die and serve the Emperor.
Kolea ran on into a rain of fire. He was a big man who had served a long
time in the mines of Verghast. Grim, largely humourless, powerful. He should
have formed a huge target, but somehow the enemy fire missed him. Shots
ripped the air around him, cast sparks from the pillars, blew stone chips from
the floor.
He lived.
He thought about diving for cover, but he was so nearly there it didn’t
seem to matter.
Kolea came on the enemy position from the side, leapt over the horseshoe
of sandbags and shot the two cannon gunners down.
A third lunged at him from the left and Kolea’s bayonet tip punched
through his forehead with a crack.
These brutes were Blood Pact. They wore old but well maintained suits of
armour-plated canvas dyed a dark red, drapes of ammo-belts and munition
pouches secured on black nylon webbing, and crimson steel bowl helmets
with sneering, hook-nosed blast-visors. Chaos insignia glinted on their
sleeves and chests.
More Blood Pact troops rushed out at Kolea, assuming they had been
stormed by force. Their red-tunicked forms twisted away as Varl ran
forward, firing his lasgun on auto, yelling the names of his sisters, his father,
his mother and his homestead farm.
Raflon, Nour and Brostin were right behind him. Ration made a
stupendously good shot that burst the skull of a Blood Pact trooper who was
turning out of cover from behind a doorpost.
Then Brostin washed the hallway beyond with a bright belch of
promethium flame. Something exploded. Two Blood Pact troopers staggered
into the main hall, their red uniforms ablaze, the armour plating falling out of
the burning canvas of their sleeves.
Wordlessly, Varl and Kolea heaved the enemy autocannon around on its
tripod and blitzed down into the corridor beyond: Varl firing, his hands
clamped to the yoke, Kolea feeding the belts from the use-bruised panniers.
The big old cannon had huge power. Varl knew that. A minute before he’d
been running into it.
Heavy support fire blasted from their left. Bragg was alongside them now,
firing his autocannon from the hip, his feeder Caill fighting to keep up the
supply of fresh drum mags.
“On! In!” Kolea barked. Nour and Bragg, Caill, Raflon, Hwlan, Brostin
and Brehenden, Vril and Mkvan, a dozen more, ran past them into the inner
hall, covering and firing.
Varl threw the emptied cannon aside and looked at Kolea.
“You’re mad, Gol.”
“Mad? War’s mad. We broke them, didn’t we?”
“You broke them. You’re mad. Crazy. Insane.”
“Whatever.”
They picked up their lasguns and moved on after the point men. “When I
tell Gaunt what you did—” Varl began.
“Don’t. Please don’t.”
Kolea looked round, and Varl could see his eyes, dark and serious behind
the misted plates of his gas-hood. “Just don’t.”
“We rope out. Now,” said Domor. Drop 2K lurched again as cannon fire
struck it.
“Rope out?” Sergeant Haller returned, horrified.
“Just shut up and do it or we’re dead.”
“Onto the dome?”
“Yes, onto the dome!”
“But we’ve missed the DZ! We should—”
“Should what?” snapped Domor, turning to stare at Haller. “Abort? Take
your chances with that if you like, Verghast I don’t think so—”
“Air speed’s dropping!” Milo cut in.
“Thrusters are failing. I can’t get lift!” the pilot called back from the
cockpit.
“Go!” said Domor. Haller was at one hatch, Bonin and Nehn at the other.
The burning drop was wallowing over the dome, in darkness now, the curve
of the dome eclipsing the flare of the main fight. They couldn’t see a thing.
They might as well be over the edge of the dome for all they could tell. The
night was awash of black with no solid edges.
“We have to—” Domor said.
It seemed to Commander Bree Jagdea that the fight was happening a long
way away, on another planet. Flares and flashes lit up the night sky to her
right, but they were a long, long way away.
She lay on the curved metal surface of one of Cirenholm’s habitat domes,
the secondary one she guessed. It was cold and the crossing night wind bit
deep. Her arm and several ribs were broken from the ejected landing. Her
flight suit was torn.
Her blimp-chute had barely had time to deploy as she had fired up out of
the seat of her dead fighter. Smack, the dome had come up to meet her hard.
And here, she presumed, she would stay until the midnight frosts made her
a brittle part of the dome roof decoration.
When Jagdea saw the drop-ship, it was already on fire and coming in low
over the dome towards her, spitting debris and flame, crawling crippled from
the main fight.
She saw the hatches were open, saw figures in the hatches. Men about to
rope out.
They were going long. They were going long, off the edge of the dome,
into the Scald.
She didn’t think. She pulled the toggle on the canister in her chute webbing
and popped bright incandescent fire across the dome roof around her.
“Here!” she screamed, flailing her one good arm, like someone in need of
rescue. “Here!”
In truth, she was the one doing the rescuing.
“Feth! We just got a DZ!” Bonin yelped.
“What?” Haller said, pulling at his hood to get a clear view.
“There, sergeant!” Bonin pointed.
“Steer us to port! To port!” Domor voxed the pilot.
Drop 2K yawed left, up and over the side of the secondary dome, a dark
hemisphere below it. There was a splash of almost fluorescent light on the
surface of the dome, a fizzle of flare just now beginning to sputter away.
The men roped out. Milo led the squad out of the port, his hook whizzing
down the cable until he slammed into the curving roof and tumbled off.
Domor was behind him, then Bonin, then Ezlan.
On the starboard side, Haller came out, followed by Vadim, Reggo and
Nirriam.
The men thumped down onto the roof, scrabbling for handholds, desperate
not to slide off into the night. Twenty men down, twenty-five. Thirty. Thirtyfive.
The drop’s engines failed. Clinging to the curve of the roofing panels on
his belly, Domor heard the pilot scream. He looked back. The drop-ship
simply fell out of the air and smashed into the roof, crashing a half-dozen of
the roping men under it.
Then it began to slide.
THREE
An awful creaking, screeching sound filled the air, metal on metal. There
were still at least twenty men attached to the ropes, their arrestor hook locks
biting the loose cables because of the sudden slackening. The men were
tangled, and being dragged. Domor, Nehn and Milo struggled up and watched
the blazing drop slowly sliding and shrieking away down the curve of the
dome, hauling Guardsmen after it. The pilot was still screaming.
“Cut the ropes! Cut the fething ropes!” Domor yelled.
Bonin cut the rope with his Tanith blade and fell free. He rolled, and
managed to seize hold of an icy roof strut. Eight of Haller’s men sawed their
way clear of the snarling ropes too. Ezlan lost his knife, but managed to
writhe himself out of his webbing.
The moment his blade severed it, the drop rope came whipping out of
Dremmond’s arrestor hook because it was under too much tension. The blow
left him sprawled on the roof with a long, deep slash from the hawser across
his collar.
Six more of Haller’s men and nine more of Domor’s managed to cut
themselves free of the straining rope? and ding onto the roofing panels.
Then the drop went off over the side of the dome under its own massive
weight, jerking threads of shrieking men after it.
Silence.
Milo got to his feet, unsteady. It was suddenly very dark and cold. The
raked roof underfoot was slick with frost. The only light came from the
burning tatters of debris outflung across the steeper pitches of the dome, and
the sky glow of the battle they had become detached from. Despite the figures
struggling up around him, he felt monstrously alone. They were, in effect,
castaways on a mountaintop at night.
“Sound off!” Domor stammered over the vox. One by one, out of order, the
survivors reeled off their call-signs. Fifteen of Domor’s squad had survived.
Haller had fourteen. The soldiers began to congregate on a flat decking area
behind a vox-mast that protruded from the dome like a corroded thorn.
Everyone was unsteady on their feet and there were some heart stopping
slips.
Ezlan and Bonin joined the group, carrying an injured female aviator
between them. Her name was Jagdea. Her Lightning had been brought down
and she’d ejected onto the roof. She’d been the one who’d popped the flare
and guided them in.
Her arm was broken and she was slipping into shock, so she barely heard
the mumbled gratitude of the Guardsmen.
Milo glanced round sharply as he heard a thump. Dremmond, wounded and
weighed down by his flamer, had risen only to lose his feet on the ice. He’d
gone down hard and was starting to slide, slowly but definitely, down the
dome’s curve.
“Feth! Oh feth!” he burbled. His gloved hands scrabbled at the slippery
metal and plasteel, frantic for purchase. “Oh feth me!”
Milo moved. Dremmond had already slid right past two troopers either too
stunned to move or too aware of their own tenuous footing. Dremmond’s
dangling arrestor hook and promethium tanks were squealing over the roof
metal.
Milo slithered down towards him. He heard several voices yell at him.
His feet went out and he landed on his backside, sliding down himself now.
Unable to stop, he banged into Dremmond, who clutched at him, and they slid
together. Faster. Faster.
The lip of the roof looked hideously close. Milo could see the burnt score
marks where the weight of the drop-ship had gone over just moments before.
They jerked to a halt. Breathing hard, Milo realised his las-gun strap had
fouled a rusty rivet standing proud of the plating. Dremmond clung to him.
The canvas strap began to stretch and fray.
Something heavy bounced down the frosty roof beside them. It was a
length of salvaged drop-rope, playing out from the darkness above.
“Grab it!” Milo heard a voice call from above. He got his hands around it.
Looking up, he saw a trooper edging hand over hand down the rope towards
them. It was the Verghastite, Vadim. A huddle of shadows further up the slope
showed where Bonin, Haller, Domor and several of the others were
anchoring the other end of the rope under the vox-mast.
Vadim reached them.
“Like this, like this,” he said, showing them how to coil the rope around
their palms so that it wouldn’t work loose. “You all right?”
“Yes,” said Milo.
“Hang on.”
To Milo’s incredulity, Vadim continued on down the rope past them,
making for the very edge of the roof lip. The air-exchanger on the back of his
rebreather hood puffed clouds of steam and ice crystals out as he exerted
himself.
Vadim reached the lip, wound the trailing end of the rope around his ankle
like an aerialist, and then rolled onto his belly, so that he was hanging out
over the abyss headfirst.
“What the feth is he doing?” Dremmond stuttered.
Milo shook his head — a futile response for a man in a gas-hood — but he
was lost for words. They could only hold on and watch.
Vadim moved again, rolling upright and freeing his ankle only to lash the
rope end around his waist, using his arrestor hook as a double lock. Then he
reached into his webbing and dug out a roll of cable, a metal reinforced
climbing line much narrower in gauge than the drop rope, a standard issue
part of every Guardsman’s kit He fiddled with it a moment, securing it to the
lifeline the men above were holding out and then swung back over the side.
“Taking the weight you hear me, sergeant?” Vadim suddenly voxed.
“Understood,” voxed Haller.
“Make sure you’re gakking well anchored,” Vadim said.
“We’re tied back to a goddamn mast here.”
“Good. Then smooth, hard pulls. Count off three between and do them
together or we’ll all end up down there somewhere.”
“Got it.”
“Go.”
The main rope jerked. Slowly, Milo realised they were sliding up the
dome again, a few centimetres at a time. He clung on and felt Dremmond’s
hands tighten on him.
“Come on!” Vadim urged from below.
It seemed to take an age. Milo felt numb. Then hands were reaching for
him and dragging him and Dremmond up amongst the cluster of bodies
around the mast where the rope was tied off.
When he looked back down at Vadim, Milo was astonished to see he
wasn’t alone. He was dragging two more figures with him. Milo immediately
added his own strength to the steady, regular heaves.
Vadim had found Seena and Arilla, the two Verghastite women from
Haller’s squad who crewed the autocannon. They’d been dragged off the
dome by the drop-ship, but their section of rope had parted and snagged
around a vent under the lip. They’d been left hanging in space. Vadim had
heard their desperate calls on his way down to Milo and Dremmond.
The Ghosts pulled the trio to comparative safety. Vadim lay flat for a
moment, exhausted. Fayner, the one surviving field medic, checked the girls
over and then packed Dremmond’s ugly wound, the exposed areas of which
were beginning to blister.
The Ghosts began to light lamp packs and check over their weapons and
equipment. Haller and Domor were consulting pocket compass and viewers,
looking up the massive swell of the dome. Domor called Bonin over. He was
one of the best scouts in the regiment, one of Mkoll’s chosen.
“What are we going to do?” Nehn asked Milo.
“Find a way in?” Milo shrugged.
“How?” growled Lillo, one of the veteran Vervunhive troopers from
Haller’s squad.
Bonin heard him and looked round. He held up a flimsy fold of paper.
“The Emperor has blessed us. Or rather, Gaunt has. I have a map.”
There was no one there.
Zhyte peered out of cover, but the corridor ahead, a wide access way, was
empty. Singis voxed in a confirmation from the far side.
Zhyte edged forward. The Urdeshi main force had been on the ground in
the primary dome for almost an hour now and they’d advanced barely three
hundred metres from the DZ itself. True, they were inside the dome. But it
had taken time and men. They’d lost so many to the enemy nightfighters on the
run into the DZ, and then so many, many more in the brutal fight to storm the
hatchways.
Now, it seemed as if the enemy had simply given up and vanished.
Zhyte crawled on his knees and elbows over to Singis, who was logging
the situation on a data-slate as his vox-officer Gerrishon whispered
information from the other units.
“Let me see,” Zhyte said, taking the slate anyway. His number two,
Shenko, was still held fast in a hard fight along the promenade. Zhyte could
hear the ragged fighting and weapon discharge from outside. Three forces,
including his own, had penetrated the dome proper through main hatchways,
meeting fierce resistance from squads of the Blood Pact scum, nightmarish in
their red battledress and snarling, hook-nosed masks. There were status
reports from Gaunt’s mob at the secondary DZ and Fazalur’s at the tertiary,
and it seemed they had ground to a halt too, but Zhyte didn’t much care. This
was his baby. The primary dome was the main objective, and the Seventh
Urdeshi had been given that honour. It was a matter of pride. They would
take this blasted place.
But it had all gone so quiet. Ten minutes before, these access halls had
been the scene of ferocious, almost hand-to hand-killing. The corpses and the
battle damage all around testified to that.
And then, the Blood Part had simply melted away.
“They may have fallen back. Perhaps to better defensive positions deeper
in the dome,” Singis suggested.
Zhyte nodded but he didn’t honestly give a little pebble crap for that idea.
If the Blood Pact had wanted to hold them off, they’d been in a position to do
it from the beginning. The Urdeshi had managed a few tricks, forced a few
advantages, but it was nothing much. The enemy defence had been superb,
and viable. It made no sense for them to have abandoned it for better
positions. Singis was talking out of his arse.
Zhyte tossed the slate back to his adjutant. Though it hurt his pride to think
it, this had been a disaster all round. His entire force might by now be
impact-splats down in the Scald levels if it hadn’t been for the Phantine
Lightnings that had driven the enemy nightfighters off. Not that he’d ever
admit it to that sour bitch aviator Jagdea. Thanks to the air support, he’d got a
good proportion of his men down. He’d lost hundreds rather than thousands.
And now this. Like his storm-troops were being toyed with.
He yanked the vox-mic from Gerrishon.
“Belthini? Rhintlemann? You hearing me?” The officers commanding the
other two intruder forces voxed back affirmatives immediately.
“I don’t know what the good crap is going on, but I’m not going to roll
about here all night. Three minute count, on my mark from now. We’re going
to push ahead. Stir ’em up at least.”
They confirmed the order. Enough of this creeping around, Zhyte thought
exchanging his weapon’s clip for a fresh one. He had a pack satisfyingly full
of fresh ones.
“Go left,” he told Singis. “Take groups three and four. Six and two
advance with me. First port of call is that main hatch there. I want it secure
and I want the support weapons up smart to set up along that colonnade.”
“Yes sir.”
“While we’re at it… Kadakedenz?”
The recon-officer crouching to Singis’ left looked up.
“Sir?”
“Hand pick six men and push in through that side hatch. They could be
lying in wait, hoping to enfilade us.”
“Enfilade us, sir?”
“Shoot us sideways in the arse, Kadakedenz!”
“I don’t think that’s what enfilade means, sir. Not technically—”
“I don’t know what ‘shut the crap up you sag-arsed tosser’ means,
Kadakedenz. Not technically. But I’m going to say that too. Can you whip up
a side team and skidaddle it sideways to support my move, or are you too
busy making inadvertent crap-streaks in your britches?”
“I can do it sir, yes sir.”
Zhyte looked at his wrist-chrono. The beater hand was ticking towards the
static marker needle he’d punched and set while giving Belthini and
Rhintlemann the order mark.
“Let’s move like we mean business.”
In a side hall off the main access to the secondary dome, gun smoke drifting
in the cool air, Trooper Wersun was loading his last clip. “Last chance box?”
asked Gaunt moving up next to him. Wersun reacted in surprise. “Yes, sir.
Last dip, sir.”
“Use it sparingly.” Gaunt huddled down next to him and slid a fresh sickle
pattern magazine for his bolt pistol out of his ammo web. He’d sheathed his
power sword for the moment.
As far as Gaunt knew, most of his men were now, like Wersun, down to
their last. If he ever got out of this, he’d use the power blade of Heironymo
Sondar to put on a novelty ventriloquist show for the Ghosts, using the
Munitorium chief at Hessenville as the screaming puppet.
Gaunt’s blood was up. This should have been easier. The Blood Pact were
damn good. He’d been through a fight in the outer hatches that had been as
hard and nasty as anything in his notable career.
“Caober?”
“Sir,” replied the Tanith scout huddled up against a fallen pile of ceiling
girders. “Anything?”
“No, sir. Not a fething sign. Where did they go?”
Gaunt sat back against a block of bullet-chipped masonry. Where indeed?
He was overheating in the hood now, and sweat was dribbling down his
spine.
Beltayn, his vox-man, was nearby. Gaunt waved him over.
“Mic, sir?”
“No, plug me in.”
Beltayn wound a small cable from his heavy, high-gain vox-pack and
pushed the jack into a socket on the side of Gaunt’s hood. Gaunt’s headset
micro-bead now had the added power of Beltayn’s unit.
“One, two?”
“Two, one.”
“Colm? Tell me you see bad guys.”
“Not so much as a murmur, boss,” Corbec replied over the link. His force
was advancing slowly down the access halls parallel to Gaunt’s.
“Keep me advised. One, three?”
“Three,” responded Rawne.
“Any good news where you are?”
“Negative. We’re at the mouth of an access tunnel. Five zero five if you’ve
got your map handy. Where did they go?”
“I’m open to offers.”
“Four, one.”
“Go ahead, Mkoll.”
“We’ve got the promenade clear. Bray, Tarnash and Burone are holding the
west end, Soric and Maroy the east. I think Kolea, Obel and Varl got their
squads in through a hatch west of you.”
“I’ll check. Any movement?”
“It all went quiet about ten minutes ago, sir.”
“Stay on top of them, Mkoll.”
“Understood.”
“Nine? Six? Twelve?”
Kolea, Varl and Obel responded almost simultaneously. “We’ve still got
contact here, sir!” Varl said urgently. “We-feth!”
“Six? Six, this is one?”
“Six, one! Sorry. It’s hot here. Got us a firelight in an antechamber, heavy
fire, heavy cover.”
“One, six, report position. Six?”
“Twelve, one,” Obel cut in. “Vari’s under fire. Kolea’s boys are moving in
support. We’re through to access 588.” Gaunt waved a hand and Beltayn
passed him the chart slate.
Five eight eight. Bless Varl, Obel and Kolea. They were hard in, deeper
than any Ghost unit. And from the look of Beltayn’s log, deeper than any
Imperial force. They were almost into the main habs inside the secondary
dome. Excluding casualties, Gaunt had perhaps seventy-five men almost a
kilometre inside the city.
“Right,” said Gaunt. “They’ve set the pace. Let’s close it up.”
It was the small, dead hours of the night, and a hard crust of frost had formed
over the outer surface of Cirenholm’s secondary dome. The air was blackcold,
and polluted snow crystals twinkled down.
The survivors of drop 2K moved slowly up the bowl of the vast
superstructure, their progress hampered by the treacherous conditions and by
the injured: Commander Jagdea, who had to be carried: Dremmond with his
lacerated shoulder; Guthrie with his head wound; Arilla, who had dislocated
an elbow when the drop went down.
Bonin moved ahead, at point. The whole, vast roof was creaking as the
temperature contracted the metal. On occasions, their rubber soled boots
stuck fast if they stood in one place too long.
The light wash in the sky from the main assault behind the curve of the
dome seemed to have died down. Had they lost? Won? All Bonin could see
were the bars of smoke drifting up from the domes and the fathomless night
punctuated by stars.
His mother, God-Emperor rest and protect her, had always said he had
been born under a lucky star. She said this, he was sure, because his life had
not been easy from the start.
His had been a difficult birth, during a cold spring in County Cuhulic,
marked by inauspicious signs and portents. Berries out late, haw-twist
turning to white flowers without seeding, the larisel hibernating until
Watchfrost. While still a babe in arms, he had been blighted by illness. Then,
while he was still in the cradle, forest fires had taken their home in the
summer of 745. The whole county had suffered then, and the Bonin family,
fruiters by trade, had suffered with the best. It had taken two hard years of
living in tents while his father and uncles rebuilt the homestead.
Until the age of eight, Bonin had been known as Mach by all the family.
His mother had always had this thing about Lord Solar Macharius, especially
since a copy of his Life had been the only thing she had been able to save
from the family home during the fire. An often bewildered and contradictory
devotee of the fates, his mother had considered this another of her signs.
At eight, as was the custom with most old Tanith families, Bonin had been
baptised and given his true names. It was considered that a child grew into
the names he or she would need, and formally naming a child at birth was
premature. The custom wasn’t observed much now.
Bonin stopped his reverie and gazed up at the cold night sky. The custom
wasn’t observed at all now, he corrected himself. All those billions of lights
up there, and not one of them was Tanith.
He remembered the day of his baptism. Coming down to the river on a
chilly spring afternoon, the sky over the nal-woods a sullen white. Shivering
in his baptismal smock, his older sisters hugging him to keep him warm and
stop his tears.
The village minister at the waterside.
His mother, in her best dress, so proud.
Dunked in freezing, rapid river water and coming up crying, he had been
given the name Simen Urvin Macharius Bonin. Simen, after his father. Urvin
after a charismatic uncle who had helped rebuild their home.
Bonin remembered his mother, soft, warm and excited, drying him off after
the baptism in the private shrine of their house, under the painted nalwood
panels.
“You’ve been through so much, you’re lucky. Lucky. Born under a lucky
star.”
Which one, Bonin wondered now, halting and looking up at the curve of
the dome as the ice gleamed.
Not Tanith, that was certain.
But the luck had never left him. He was sure his mother had rubbed raw
luck into him that day with the rough folds of the towel.
He had survived the fall of Tanith. On Menazoid Epsilon, he had walked
away without a scratch when a concussion round vapourised the three men in
the fox-hole with him. On Monthax, he had seen a las-bolt pass so close to
his face he could taste its acrid wake. On Verghast, he had been part of
Gaunt’s and Kolea’s team in the assault on the Heritor’s Spike. During the
boarding, he had lost his grip and fallen off. He should have died. Even
Gaunt, who’d seen him fall, presumed him lost, and was stunned to find out
he had survived.
There were sixteen vertebrae in his back made of composite steel, and an
augmetic socket on his pelvis. But he was alive. Lucky. Fated. Just like his
mother had always told him. A sign.
Born under a lucky star.
But he often wondered, how long would it burn?
The deck under his boots was glossy wet, not caked in frost.
Bonin knelt down and felt the roof plating. Even through his glove, he
could feel the warmth.
Ahead, a quarter of a kilometre away, rose the stacks and smoking flues of
Cirenholm’s vapour mill. The drizzle of wet heat was keeping this part of the
roof thawed.
Bonin consulted the map Gaunt had given him. The mill superstructure was
the only thing that penetrated the roof of the secondary dome. There were
inspection hatches up here, ventilator pipes.
A way inside.
Whatever the star was, it was still watching over him.
The access tunnel marked on the map as 505 gave out into what had once
been an ordered little park. High overhead, in the girders of the dome roof,
sunlamps and environment processors hung in bolted cages, but they had long
since been deactivated and the trimmed fruit trees and arbors had died off.
Leaf litter, grey and dry, covered the mosaic paths and the areas of dead
grass. Brittle-branched grey-trunked trees filled the beds, grim as
gravestones.
Rawne moved his squad out into the park, using the trees as cover. Feygor
swung to the left at the head of a fireteam ready to lay down protective fire
on the main force. Leyr, the platoon’s scout, edged forward. The air was cold
and dry.
Tona Criid, on the right hand edge of the formation, suddenly started and
turned, her weapon rising.
“Movement, four o’clock,” she whispered briefly into her micro-bead.
Rawne held his hand out, palm down, and everyone dropped low. Then he
pointed to Criid, Caffran and Wheln, circled his hand and pointed ahead with
a trident of three fingers.
Immediately, the three troopers rose and ran forward, fanning out keeping
their heads low. Criid dropped behind a rusty bench, and Caffran tucked
down behind the plinth of a stone centaur whose rearing forelimbs had been
shot off. Wheln got in behind a brake of dead trees.
Rawne glanced to his left and saw Neskon crawling forward with the hose
of his flamer ready. Leclan was covering him. To Rawne’s right, Banda had
her long-las resting on the elbow of a low branch. Like Criid, Jessi Banda
was one of the Verghastite females who had joined the Ghosts. They seemed
to have a particular expertise for marksmanship, and sniper was the one
regimental speciality where there were as many Verghastites as Tanith. And
as many women as men.
Rawne’s opposition to women in the regiment was so old now it was
gathering dust and everyone was tired of hearing it. He’d never questioned
their fighting ability. He just didn’t like the added stress of sexual tension it
put on the ranks.
Jessi Banda was a good example. Cheerful, sharp tongue, playful, she was
a good-looking girl with short, curly brown hair and curves that the mattblack
battledress couldn’t hide. She’d been a loom-worker in Vervunhive,
and then a member of Kolea’s scratch company guerillas. Now she was a
specialist sniper in the Imperial Guard, and a damn good one. The death of
one of the Tanith snipers had forced her rotation into Rawne’s platoon.
He found her distracting. He found Criid, the surly ex-gang girl,
distracting. Both of them were very easy on the eye. He tried not to think
about Nessa, the sniper in Kolea’s unit. She was downright beautiful…
“Sir?” whispered Banda, cocking her head at Rawne. Through the lenses
of her gas-hood, Rawne could see a smile in her eyes.
Feth! I’m doing it again! Rawne cursed himself. Maybe it wasn’t them.
Maybe it was him…
“Anything?” he asked.
She shook her head.
“Movement!” Wheln hissed over the vox.
Rawne saw them for a brief moment. Four, maybe five enemy troopers in
muddy red, moving hurriedly down the walkway on the far right hand edge of
the park.
Wheln’s lasrifle cracked, and Caffran and Criid quickly opened up too.
One of the figures buckled and dropped and las-shots splintered against
the wall of the park. Two of the others turned and started to fire into the park.
Rawne saw their iron-masked faces, sneering above the flashing muzzles of
their weapons.
There was a loud report from his right. Banda had fired, loosing one of the
sniper-variant long-las’ overpowered “hot shot” rounds. One of the firing
enemy was thrown back against the wall as if he’d been struck by a wrecking
ball.
A flurry of fire whipped back and forth through the park edge now. There
must have been more than five of them, Rawne decided. He couldn’t see. He
ran forward, dodging between tree trunks. A sapling just behind him ruptured
at head height and swished back and forth from the recoil like a metronome
arm.
“Seven one, three!”
“Seven one, sir!” Caffran responded. Rawne could hear the background
fire echoed and distorted over the vox-link. “Sit-rep!”
“I count eight. Five in the bushes at my ten, three back in the doorway.
We’ve splashed another four.”
“I can’t eyeball! Call it!” Rawne ordered.
From behind the statue’s plinth, Caffran glanced around. Whatever faults
you could lay at Major Rawne’s door — and heartlessness, lack of humour,
deceit and cruelty would be amongst them —he was a damn fine troop
leader. Here, with no view of his own, he was devolving command to
Caffran without hesitation, allowing the young private to order the
deployment. Rawne trusted Caffran. He trusted them all. That was enough to
make him a far greater leader than many of the so-called “good guys” Caffran
had seen in his Guard career.
“Wheln! Criid! Tight and right. Hit the door. Leclan! Osket! Melwid!
Concentrate on those bushes! Neskon, up and forward!”
There was a crackle of barely verbal acknowledgements. The las-fire
coming out of the park’s tree-line into the path-edge bushes increased in
intensity.
Caffran got off a few more shots, but something heavy like a stubber was
bracketing his position, chipping shards of stone off the plinth and gouging
divots out of the dead grass. He threw himself back as one rebounding shell
scarred his boot and another pinged hard off his warknife’s blade, leaving an
ugly notch in the fine-honed edge.
“Banda! See the panels on the end wall?”
“Got ’em, Caff.”
“Fifth one in from the left, middle rivet. Aim on that, but drop the shot
about five metres.”
“Uh huh…”
There was another sharp whine-crack and part of the straggled bushes
blew apart as the hot-shot went through it. The stub fire ceased. If she hadn’t
actually killed him, Banda had certainly discouraged the bastard.
“Got one!” whooped Melwid meanwhile.
Criid fired from behind the bench until a trio of close shots splintered the
seat-back. She got down onto her belly in time to see two of the enemy
running from the doorway towards another dump of bushes near the end of
the path. She flicked her toggle to full-auto and raked them from her prone
position. One of them dropped a stick grenade he had been about to toss, and
the blast threw fine grit and dry dumps of dirt into the park.
Rawne had moved in close now, into the stands of dead trees by the edge
of the fighting. Leyr was nearby. With a coughing rush, flames spewed out
across the line of bushes as Neskon finally got range. Rawne heard harsh,
short screams and the firecracker blitz of ammunition cooking off.
“Breakers!” Leyr shouted.
Rawne turned, and caught a glimpse of two red-tunicked figures sprinting
from the path into the trees, moving past them into the park. He jumped up
and ran, leaping fallen boughs and kicking up stones and dead leaves.
“Left! Left!” he shouted to Leyr who was running too.
Rawne ran on. Breathing came hard when you exerted yourself in a
rebreather. Running jarred the hood so that visibility was impaired.
He caught a glimpse of red, and fired once, but the shot simply skinned the
bark of a tree. Leyr fired too, off to his left.
Rawne came round the side of a particularly large tree and slammed into
the Blood Pact trooper who had been dodging the other way. They went
sprawling.
Swearing, Rawne grappled with the man. The enemy trooper was hefty
and strong. His arms and body seemed hard, as if packed with augmetic
systems. His big, filthy hands were bare and showed the scar tissue of deep,
old wounds across the palms, made during his ritual pledge of allegiance to
the obscenity Urlock Gaur.
He fought back, kicking Rawne hard and spitting out a string of curses in a
language Rawne didn’t know and had no intention of looking up later.
They rolled in the dirt. Rawne’s weapon, damped between them, fired
wildly. All Rawne could see was the front of the foe’s tunic: old, frayed,
stained a dull red the colour of dried blood. It occurred to Rawne that it
probably was dried blood.
Rawne got an arm free and threw a short but brutal punch that lurched the
growling brute off him. For a moment, he saw the man’s face: the battered
iron grotesque fashioned in the shape of a hook-nosed, leering fright mask,
hinged in place under a worn bowl helmet covered in flaking crimson paint
and finger-daubed runes of obscenity.
Then the Blood Pact trooper head-butted him.
Rawne heard a crack, and felt the stunning impact and a stab of white-hot
pain in his left eye. He reeled away. The hooked nose of the iron grotesque
had punched in through the left lens of Rawne’s gas-hood like a blunt hatchet,
breaking the plastic and digging deep. His head was swimming. He couldn’t
see out of his left eye and he could feel blood running down inside his hood.
Raging, Rawne threw a hooking punch that hit the enemy in the side of the
neck. His assailant fell sideways, choking.
Rawne drew his silver Tanith knife, grabbed the man around the left elbow
to yank his arm up against the side of his head, and stabbed the blade up to
the hilt in the man’s armpit.
The soldier of Chaos went into violent spasms. Rawne rolled back onto
his knees.
Leyr came out of the bushes nearby. “The other one’s dead. Ran straight
into Feygor. I-feth! Medic!”
Ledan was the platoon’s corpsman, one of the troopers trained in the
rudiments of field aid by Dorden and Curth. As soon as he saw Rawne, he
checked the brass air-tester sewn into the side of his kit.
“Air’s clean. Stale but clean. Get that hood off.”
Leyr pulled Rawne’s gas-hood off and Ledan took a look at the face
wound.
“Feth!” Leyr murmured.
“Shut up. Go and do something useful,” Rawne told him. “How is it?”
“Looks a right mess, sir, but I think it’s superficial.” Ledan took out some
tweezers and started removing slivers of lens plastic from Rawne’s face.
“You’ve got blood in your eye from the cuts, and your eyelid is torn. Hang
on, this’ll smart.”
Ledan sprayed counterseptic from a puffer bottle and then taped a gauze
pad over Rawne’s eye.
“I haven’t lost the eye then.”
“No, sir. But Dorden needs to look at it.”
Rawne got up and tucked his gas-hood away in his belt. He’d had enough
of it anyway. He went over to the corpse and pulled out his knife, twisting the
grip to break the suction and free the blade.
Feygor was moving the platoon up. The fight on the path was over.
“We got them all,” Caffran reported.
“Any casualties?”
“Only you,” said Feygor.
“You can all lose the hoods if you want,” said Rawne. He walked down to
the path. Criid, Wheln, Neskon and Melwid were examining the bodies.
“Made a mess of this,” said Neskon, indicating the charred bush and the
three blackened corpses behind it. “I think they were carrying something.”
Rawne knelt down and took a look, ignoring the reek of promethium and the
spicy stink of seared meat. It was some kind of equipment box, scorched with
soot and burned out. Rawne could see melted cables and broken valves
inside.
“Sir,” said Feygor quietly. The platoon had tensed at movement from the
south door, but it was more Ghosts. Captain Daur’s squad, supported by
Corporal Meryn’s which had brought Commissar Hark along with it.
“This park area’s secure,” Rawne told them. Hark nodded.
“Does that hurt?” asked Daur.
“You ask some damn fool questions sometimes, Verghast,” Rawne
snapped, though he knew full well that the young, handsome captain was
exercising his trademark ironic wit.
“Your men are unhooded,” observed Hark, holstering his plasma pistol.
“A necessity with me. But the air’s clean.”
Hark almost ripped his own hood off. “Damn well glad to get rid of that,”
he said, trying to hand-comb his thick, dark hair before putting his cap on. He
smiled at Rawne. “We’ve been so busy I hadn’t even checked the gauge.”
“Me neither,” said Rawne. “Come and take a look at this. I could use a—”
“Good eye?” Daur finished for him. Rawne heard Banda and Criid
snigger.
“Get the men to unhood, captain, if you please,” Hark told Daur. Daur
nodded and walked away, smiling.
“Insufferable feth,” Rawne growled as he walked the commissar over to
the path.
“In the God-Emperor’s illustrious brotherhood of warriors, we are all
kindred, major,” returned Hark smoothly.
“A little boost from the holy primers?”
“No idea. I’m getting so good at this I can make lines like that up off the
cuff.”
They both laughed. Rawne liked Hark, probably about as much as he
disliked Daur. Daur, good-looking, popular, efficient, had entered the
regiment’s upper command like a virus, dumped there on an equal footing to
Rawne himself, thanks to Gaunt’s generous efforts to integrate the
Verghastites. Hark, on the other hand, had come in against Gaunt’s will,
indeed his original task had been to turn Gaunt out of rank. Everyone had
hated him at first. But he’d proved himself in combat and also proved himself
remarkably loyal to the spirit of the Tanith First. Rawne had been pleased
when Gaunt had invited Hark to stay on as regimental commissar in support
of Gaunt’s own split role.
Rawne welcomed Hark’s presence in the Ghosts because he was a hard
man, but a fair one. He respected him because they’d risked their lives for
each other in the final battle for the Shrinehold on Hagia.
And he liked him because, if only technically, he was a thorn in Ibram
Gaunt’s side.
“You really don’t like the Verghastites, do you, Rawne?” said Hark.
“Not my place to like or dislike, sir. But this is the Tanith First,” Rawne
replied, stressing the word ‘Tanith’. “Besides, I’ve only seen a handful of
them that can fight as hard or as well as the Tanith.”
Hark nodded slyly over at Banda and Criid. “I see you keep the decorative
ones in your platoon though.”
Now it was Hark’s turn to joke at Rawne’s expense, but somehow it didn’t
matter. Rawne would have floored Daur for a quip like that.
Hark crouched down and looked at the half-melted box.
“Why do we care what this is?” he asked.
“They were moving it through the park. That way,” Rawne added,
indicating the direction the Imperials had been advancing. “Must have been
important because they were breaking cover to move it.”
Hark drew his blade. It was a standard issue, broad-bladed dress dagger,
a pugio with a gold aquila crest. He was the only man in the regiment who
didn’t have a silver Tanith warknife. He picked at the edge of the box-seal
with the pugio’s top.
“Vox set?”
“Don’t think so, sir,” said Rerval, the vox-officer in Rawne’s squad.
“It’s a generator cell for a void shield.”
They looked round. Daur had rejoined them.
“Are you sure, captain?” asked Hark dubiously.
Daur nodded. “I was a garrison officer on the Hass West Fort, sir. Part of
my daily duty was to test start the voids on the battery nests.”
Smug know-all bastard, Rawne thought. “So what were they doing w—”
“Sir!” Caffran called down the pathway. He was with Feygar’s fireteam at
the end hatch.
They hurried down to join him. Meryn and Daur deployed their troops out
across the park to cover all the access points.
The hatch was open and its arch was dim. Beyond it, Rawne could see a
corridor with a grilled floor leading deeper into the dome structure.
“Cables, there, inside the jamb,” said Feygor, pointing out what they’d all
missed. Feygor had notoriously sharp eyes. He had been able to spot a larisel
at night at a hundred metres back home in the Great West Nals. And kill it
with a dirty look. Feygor should have been in the scout section, but Rawne
had worked determinedly not to lose his lean, murderous ally to Mkoll’s
bunch. And it was just as likely Mkoll didn’t want Feygor anyway.
“Booby trap,” Caffran said, speaking what they were all thinking. A quick
vox-check confirmed that all the accessways off the north side of the park
showed similar signs of tampering.
Daur called Criid over. “Permission to risk my health recklessly,” he
asked Hark lightly.
“Don’t wait on my account,” Rawne muttered.
“You have an idea, captain?” Hark asked.
“Get everyone to fall back from the doorways,” Daur said. He borrowed
Criid’s lasrifle and the small, polished brooch mount she kept in her pocket.
It was her little trademark, and Daur requisitioned it now, sending her back
into cover.
Daur fixed the mount to the bayonet lug of the rifle as he had seen Criid do
and then gingerly extended the gun out at arm’s length.
“Pray to the Golden Throne…” Hark whispered to Rawne, down in cover.
“Oh, I am,” said Rawne.
The brooch-mount had been polished to a mirror, and it was a canny tool
for seeing round corners without risking a headshot. Rawne knew that
several Ghosts had copied Criid’s idea, realising how useful such a thing
was for room to room clearance. Scout Caober used a shaving mirror.
Daur peered in via the little mirror for a few seconds and then ran back to
the line.
“Thanks, Tona,” he said, handing the brooch and the weapon back to Criid.
“The door’s rigged with a void shield,” Daur told them. “It’s not active
yet, but it’s charged.”
“You know because?”
“Smell of ozone.”
“So they’re intending to block our advance in this section with shields. We
better get in there and disable them,” Feygor said.
“Unless they’re waiting for us to try,” said Daur. “Might explain why
they’ve fallen back so suddenly,” said Hark. “Bringing us forward, luring us,
so they can cut us off.”
“Or in two,” said Daur. “What?” asked Rawne.
“You ever been standing in a void field when it was activated, major?”
“No.”
“It was a rhetorical question. The field edge would cut you in half.”
Rawne looked at Hark. “I say we run it. Get as many through as we can.”
“So that those who get through can be cut down with nowhere to run
because there’s a void at their backs?” Daur asked sourly.
“You got a better idea, Verghast?”
Daur smiled at him without warmth and tapped the pips on his coat.
“Address me as ‘captain’, major. It’s a small courtesy, but I think even you
should be capable of it.”
Hark held up his hand. “Enough. Get me the vox-officer.”
Free of the damn gas-hood at last, Gaunt set his cap on his head, brim first
He glanced at his watch, took a sip of water from his flask, and looked down
the hallway.
Two storeys high, it was ornate with gilt and floral work, and the floor
was a checkerboard of red and white plasteel tiles. Crystal chandeliers hung
every ten metres, blazing out twinkly yellow light that shone from the huge
wall mirrors.
Gaunt glanced back. His platoon was in cover down the length of the hall,
using the architraves and pillars for shelter. Wersun and Arcuda were
guarding a side door which led into a section of staterooms that had already
been swept. There was a scent in the air. Fading perfume.
Cirenholm had been a rich place once, before Gaur’s Blood Pact had
overrun it. Here in the palatial halls of the secondary dome, the elegance
lingered, melancholy and cold.
Caober reappeared, coming back down the hall, hugging the shadows. He
dropped down next to Gaunt. “Shield?”
Caober nodded. “Looks like what Commissar Hark described. It’s wired
into the end doorway, and to the pair adjoining. There was a staircase, but I
didn’t fancy checking that without a fireteam.”
“Good work,” said Gaunt and took the mic Beltayn held out.
“One, four?”
“Four, one,” Mkoll replied. “All exits north of 651 are wired for shields.”
“Understood. Stay where you are.” Gaunt looked at his chart, and ran a
finger around a line that connected the sites his men had reported as covered
by shields. They’d all found them: Corbec Burone, Bray, Soric. Sergeant
Theiss’ squad had actually passed one, and then fallen back rapidly once
Gaunt had alerted them. Only the spearhead formed by Obel, Kolea and Varl
had gone beyond, too far beyond to call back now.
“What are they up to, d’you think, sir?” asked Beltayn. “Something’s
awry.”
“Yes it is, Beltayn.” Gaunt smiled at the vox-officer’s use of his favourite
understatement. He looked at the chart again. His company — with the
exception of the spearhead — had penetrated about two-thirds of a kilometre
into the dome and had all come up against prepared shield emplacements, no
matter what level they were on. Soric’s mob were six levels lower thanks to
a firefight and the chance discovery of a cargo lift. It was as if the enemy had
given up the outer rim of the dome to lure them in against this trap.
But what kind of trap? Was it meant to stop them dead? Cut their force in
half? Pull them on and trap them without hope of retreat?
Gaunt took the mic again. “Boost it. I want Zhyte and Fazalur,” he told the
vox-man.
“1A, 3A… this is 2A. Respond. Repeat, 1A 3A, this is 2A…”
White noise. Then a burp of audio.
“…A… repeat this is 3A. Gaunt?”
“Confirmed, Fazalur. What’s your situation?”
“Advancing through the tertiary dome. Low resistance.”
“We’ve found shields here, Fazalur. Void shields laid across our path. Any
sign there?”
“Active shields?”
“Negative.”
“We’ve seen nothing.”
“Watch for them and stay in contact.”
“Agreed, 2A I stand advised. Out.”
“1A this is 2A respond. 1A respond this channel. 2A to 1A respond…”
“I’ve got Commissar Gaunt on the primary channel, sir,” Gerrishon called.
“Tell him I’m busy,” snorted Zhyte, waving the next squad forward. His
unit was now a kilometre into Cirenholm’s primary dome, exploring the
marble vaults and suspiciously derelict chambers of the sky-city’s
commercial district. Ten minutes before, he had linked up with Belthini’s
group, and together they’d begun sectioning the outer dome. There was still
no sign of the enemy. No sign of anyone, in fact, apart from his own puzzlecamoed
troops. His skin was starting to crawl.
“He’s quite insistent, sir. Says something about shields.”
“Tell him I’m busy,” Zhyte repeated. His men were executing bounding
cover as they played out down the wide hallway, passing under vast holoportraits
of Phantine’s great and good.
“Busy with what, sir?”
Zhyte stopped with a heavy sigh and turned to look at his suddenly pale
vox-officer. “Inform the stubborn little pool of canid-piss that I’m taking a
masterful dump down the neck of Sagittar Slaith and I’ll call him back when
I’ve finished the paperwork.”
“I, sir—”
“Oh, give me that, you limpoid!” Zhyte spat and snatched the mic, cuffing
Gerrishon for good measure. “This had better be good, Gaunt,” he snarled.
“Zhyte?”
“Yes!”
“We’ve found shields, Zhyte, dug into doorways along marker 48:00
which would correlate to 32:00 on your map—”
“Do you have a point or are you calling for advice?”
“I’m calling to warn you, colonel. Secondary dome is wired for shields
and tertiary may be too. Watch for them. Slaith, Emperor rot him, is no fool,
and neither are the Blood Pact. They’re planning something, and—”
“Do you know the name of my regiment, Gaunt?”
“Say again?”
“Do you know the name of my unit?”
“Of course. The Urdeshi Seventh Storm-troop. I don’t see w—”
“The Urdeshi Seventh Storm-troop. Yes, sir. Our name is woven in silver
thread on an honour pennant that hangs amongst the thousand flags beside the
Golden Throne on Terra. We have been an active and victorious unit for a
thousand and seventy-three glorious years. Is the Tanith First marked on an
honour pennant. Gaunt?”
“I don’t believe it is—”
“I know for a damn fact it isn’t! You were only born yesterday and you’re
nothing! Nothing! There’s only a bloody handful of you anyway! Don’t you
dare presume to tell me my business, you piece of shit! Warning me? Warning
me? We are taking this bastard city piece by piece, hall by hall, with our
blood and our sweat, and the last thing I want to hear is you whining about
something that’s making you soil your britches because you’re too scared to
do a soldier’s job and get on with it! You hear me, Gaunt? Gaunt?”
Gaunt calmly handed the mic back to Beltayn. “You get him, sir?”
“No. I got some fething idiot who’s about to die,” said Gaunt.
Zhyte cursed and threw the mic back at his vox-officer. The handset hit
Gerrishon in the face and he fell down suddenly.
“Get up, you pile of crap! Gerrishon! On your feet!”
Zhyte paused abruptly. There was a widening pool of blood spreading out
across the floor under Gerrishon’s head. The vox-man’s face was tranquil, as
if he was sleeping. But there was a blackened hole in his forehead.
“God-Emperor!” Zhyte howled and turned. A las-round hit him in the
shoulder and slammed him to the floor.
Everything, every last damn bloody thing, was exploding around him. He
could hear screams and weapons fire. Laser shots spluttered along the walls,
shattering ancient holo-plate portraits out of their frames.
Zhyte crawled round. He saw three of his advance guard topple as they
ran. Mists of blood sprayed out of them. One was hit so hard his left leg burst
and came spinning off.
His men were firing. Some were screaming. All were yelling. A grenade
went off.
Zhyte got up and ran back down the hallway, firing his weapon behind him.
He ducked behind a pillar and looked back to see Blood Pact troopers
spilling into the hall from all sides. They were bayoneting the Urdeshi men in
cover, and firing wild but effective bursts at those trying to retreat.
“Regroup! Regroup!” Zhyte yelled into his micro-bead. “Hatch 342!
Now!” Three four two. There was a gun nest there. Support fire.
He turned and fell over a corpse. It was Kadekadenz, his recon man. His
carcass had been messily eviscerated by sidelong las-fire, and ropes of
steaming entrails spilled out of it like the tentacles of some beached
cephalopod.
“Singis! Belthini! Group the men! Group them, forg—”
A blow to the shoulder slammed him over. Zhyte rolled, and saw the iron
mask of a Blood Pact trooper grinning at him as he plunged his bayonet
down.
The rusty blade stabbed through the flesh of Zhyte’s thigh and made him
shriek. He fired twice and blew the Chaos soldier off him, then tore the blade
from his leg. Blood was squirting from a major artery.
Zhyte got up, and then fell over, his boots slipping in his own blood. He
grasped the Blood Pact soldier’s fallen rifle, the smeared bayonet still
attached, and rolled over, firing.
He hit one, then another, then a third, swiping each one off his feet with the
satisfying punch of a solid las-hit.
Singis grabbed him and began to half-drag, half-carry him back towards
the hatch. There were corpses all around. Down the hall, Zhyte could see
nothing but a mob of charging Blood Pact troopers, chanting and howling as
they came on, firing, guns at belly height.
He saw his men, littering the marble floor of the hallway. Zofer, on his
back, jawless. Vocane, doubled-up and hugging the belly wound that had
killed him. Reyuri, his legs in tatters, groping at the air. Gofforallo, just
upper body and thighs attached by a smouldering spine. Hedrien, stapled to
the wall by a broken bayonet blade through the chest. Jeorjul, without a face
or a left foot, his gun still firing in spasming hands. He saw a man he couldn’t
recognise because his head had been vapourised. Another that was just
pieces of meat and bone wrapped in burning shreds of puzzle-camo.
Zhyte screamed and fired. He heard heavy weapon fire, and laughed like a
maniac as tracers whinnied down the hall and tore through the front ranks of
the advancing Blood Pact.
“Shut up! Shut up!” Singis yelled at him. “Get on your feet and help me!”
Zhyte fell dumb, like a stunned drunk, shock setting in. His trousers were
soaked red with his blood. Dyed red. Like the Blood Pact.
They were in the doorway. Three four two. Belthini was dragging him
through. He couldn’t see Singis, but he fell sidelong across the hatch opening,
and saw Bothris and Manahide manning the .50 cal cannon, raking the enemy
with tracer tire. Three four two. His support weapon pitch.
“Give the bastards hell!” he said. At least he thought he said it. He
couldn’t hear his own voice and they didn’t seem to hear him.
There was blood welling up in his throat.
Everything went quiet. Zhyte could see the furious flashes of the .50’s
barrel. The lancing tracers. The las impacts all around. He could see men’s
mouths moving, yelling. Manahide. Bothris. Belthini, in the doorway, over
him, a look on his face that seemed touchingly concerned.
Between Belthini’s legs, Zhyte saw the Blood Pact. They had Rhindemann.
They were hacking him apart with their bayonets. He was vomiting gore and
screaming.
Zhyte couldn’t hear him.
He could hear nothing but his own pounding heart. He sagged. Belthini
stooped over him. Belthini said something.
Zhyte suddenly realised he could smell something. Something sharp,
pungent. Ozone. It was ozone.
His head fell sideways. His skull bumped against the floor, and glanced
off the sill of the hatch.
He saw the little box in the hatch frame, wired to the power sockets in the
wall. There was a light flickering inside it.
Ozone.
He crawled. Crawled forward. He was sure he said something important,
but Belthini was looking over at the gun team and didn’t hear him.
There was a flash.
Just a bright flash, as if light had suddenly become solid, as if the air had
suddenly become hard. He tasted smoke and heat.
Zhyte looked back in time to see the void shield engage across the
doorway, chopping Manahide and Bothris in two, along with their .50, which
exploded. It was quite amazing. A boiling fog of blood and atomised metal.
Men falling apart, torsos and skulls cut vertically like scientific crosssections.
He saw smoothly severed white bone, sectioned brains, light
coming in through Manahide’s open mouth as the front of his face and body
spilled forward on the other side of the shield.
Two sliced portions of human meat slumped back next to him, their edges
curled and sizzling from the void field.
Zhyte looked up and saw Belthini trapped on the other side of the shield,
his image distorted and blurred by the energy. He was shouting, desperate,
hammering his fists. No sound came through.
Belthini was hit from behind by about six or seven las-rounds. Blood
sprayed up the shield and he fell against it, sliding down like a man sliding
down a pane of glass.
“Oh shit,” said Zhyte, hearing himself for the first time.
He realised the pain in his leg was gone.
And then he realised that was because his legs were still on the other side
of the shield.
FOUR
He was the only one in the group who could see the stars.
They were hidden behind the black on black cloud cover that roiled across
the heavens above the secondary dome, but he, and only he, could detect their
light spill.
Sergeant Dohon Domor was known affectionately as Shoggy Domor by the
men of the regiment. He’d been blinded in action back on Menazoid, years
ago now as it seemed to him. He’d become quite used to the bulbous
augmetic optics that crudely replaced his eyes.
Shoggy Domor. A shoggy was a little amphibian with bulging eyes found in
the woodland pools on Tanith. He corrected himself: an extinct amphibian.
The nickname had stuck.
Domor tried his micro-bead one last time, but there was nothing but static
fizzle. They were out of range, and their main gain vox-sets, both of them,
had gone down with the drop, still attached to vox-officers Liglis and Gohho.
He walked with careful steps up the dome’s treacherous curve to rejoin the
team. His augmetic eyes whirred and adjusted to reduce the light glare from
the mill stacks ahead. The tips of the chimneys showed as flaring yellow, the
stacks themselves as orange. The figures of the men were red shadows and
beyond them the night cooled into shapes of blue, purple and black.
“Anything?” asked Sergeant Haller.
“No,” Domor replied. His limbs were beginning to ache from the cold and
he could feel the throb of raw bruises. All their uniforms and the canvas of
their gas-hoods were beginning to stiffen with hoarfrost.
With Bonin leading the way, flanked by Vadim, the survivors of drop 2K
climbed cautiously into the scaffolding superstructure surrounding
Cirenholm’s vapour mill. Steamy gusts of hot, wet air exhaled over them,
thawing their ice-stiff clothes and making them sweat suddenly. They could
feel the thunder of massive turbines underfoot, shaking the roof housing.
Meltwater and condensation drooled off every surface.
The beams of their lamp packs twitched nervously back and forth. It
seemed more than a little likely that the enemy would have positioned
sentries around the roof access here.
Commander Jagdea was back on her feet. Fayner, the corps-man, had
given her a shot of dexahedrene and bound her broken right arm up across her
chest in a tight brace. She carried her snub-snouted automatic pistol in her
left hand.
They moved in under a dripping stanchion onto a massive grilled exhaust
vent that steamed away in the cold of the night. Amber heat glowed far below
down the shaft. Domor’s energy sensitive vision adjusted again.
“Ah, feth!” Nehn shuddered.
The edges of the vent and all the girders around were thick with glistening,
writhing molluscs, each one the size of an ork’s finger. They turned towards
the lights, fleshy mouth-parts twitching and weeping viscous slime. They
were everywhere, thousands of them. Arilla brushed one from her sleeve and
it left a streak of ooze that hardened quickly like glue. The fat slug made a
disgusting, meaty sound as it bounced off the roof.
“Thermovores,” said Jagdea, her breathing shallow and rapid. “Vermin.
They cluster around the heat exchangers feeding off the bacteria in the
steam.”
“Charming,” said Milo, crushing one underfoot and really wishing he
hadn’t.
“They’re harmless, trooper,” said the aviator. “Just watch for skinwings.”
“Skinwings?”
“The next link of the food chain. Pollution mutants. They feed on the
slugs.”
Milo thought about this. “And what feeds on the skinwings?”
“Scald-sharks. But we should be all right. They don’t usually come in
close to the cities. They’re deep sky hunters.”
Milo wasn’t sure what a shark was. Indeed, he wasn’t really sure what the
Scald was either, but he was conscious of the stress Jagdea put on each
word.
Bonin had stopped to consult the map, conferring with the sergeants and
with Corporal Mkeller, the Tanith scout assigned to Haller’s squad.
“That way,” Bonin said, and Mkeller concurred. The troop followed the
scouts under a series of dripping derricks that rose up from the skin of the
dome into the freezing night. Navigation lights winked on the mast tops, and
on the fatter, higher columns of the chimneys. The slugs squirmed around
them, following their lights, dribbling slime and forming glittering snotbubbles
around their snouts.
Bonin stopped by a raised vent and used his knife blade to scrape off the
clusters of thermovores. Together with Mkeller, he managed to break the vent
grille away and toss it aside.
Bonin peered in. “It’s tight, but we can make it. Break out ropes.”
“No,” said Vadim. “What?”
“Let me look at that map,” Vadim said. He turned the thin paper sheet
Bonin offered him in his gloved hands. “That’s a hot gas out-flue.”
“So?”
“So, we’ll be dead if we go down there.”
“How do you reckon that?” asked Mkeller.
Vadim looked up so that Bonin and Mkeller could see his eyes behind the
lenses of the hood. “It’s a fifty metre vertical climb. With our numbers and
our impediments—” he glanced over at Jagdea, “it’d take us upwards of two
hours to get down there.”
“So?”
“I don’t know how often this thing vents, but none of us want to be halfway
down it when the hot gas comes up. It’d broil us. Clothes, armour, skin,
flesh… all cooked off the bones.”
“How the feth do you know so much?” asked Mkeller.
“He was a roofer, back at Vervunhive,” Milo said quickly. “He knows
about this kind of thing.”
“I did some work on the heating systems. Vox-masts and sensor blooms
mostly, but heating too. Look at the way the grille you pulled off is made. The
louvres curl up… out. It’s an out-flue.”
Bonin seemed genuinely impressed. “You know this stuff, then? Good. You
call it.”
Vadim looked at the map again, pausing to wipe condensing vapour from
the eye plates of his hood. “Here… here. The big intakes. Intake shafts for the
cooler coils. It’s a longer climb, and we’ll have to be wary of duct fans and
inrush—”
“What’s inrush?” asked Domor.
“If they cycle up the fans for extra cooling, we could be caught in a wind
tunnel effect. I’m not saying it’s safe, but it’s safer.”
There was a sudden bang and a howl of heat. The flue Bonin and Mkeller
had been contemplating suddenly voided a thick cloud of superheated gasflame
and soot. It seemed, comically, to underscore the validity of Vadim’s
advice.
Bonin watched the donut of expelled gas-flame wobble up into the sky.
“I’m convinced,” he said. “Let’s go with Vadim’s plan.”
All across the secondary dome, the shields were lit, blocking them in and
penning them in the outer limits of the dome. An anxious vox-signal from
Fazalur in the tertiary dome confirmed that it was happening there too.
And then the signal cut off abruptly.
There was nothing from the Urdeshi at primary except a strangled mess of
incoherent panic.
“Form up and move in!” Gaunt ordered, swinging his squad around. He
voxed ahead to Corbec and Bray, instructing them to sweep laterally along
the edge of the shield block and converge on him.
“Can’t raise the spearhead,” Beltayn said.
Gaunt wasn’t surprised. The shield effects distorted vox-links badly. The
platoons led by Varl, Kolea and Obel were cut off from the main force, deep
in the heart of the enemy-held dome.
As he moved his men around, down a wide stairwell and across a series
of ransacked aerodrome hangars, Gaunt tried to work out the enemy tactics.
Part of it seemed blindingly obvious: allow the Imperial forces a foothold in
the perimeter of the dome, and then deprive them of advance. The question
was… what next?
He didn’t have to wait long to find out.
The Blood Pact had been waiting. They hadn’t withdrawn at all. They’d
concealed themselves in false floors and behind wall panels.
Now the Imperial invaders were penned in, they sprung their ambush,
coming out in the midst of the confused guard units.
Guard units who no longer had any room to manoeuvre.
The trooper next to Colonel Colm Corbec turned to speak and then fell silent
forever as a tracer round blew his head off. A brittle rain of las-fire
peppered down onto Corbec’s squad from balcony positions all along the
mezzanine floor he was moving across.
“Down! Down and cover! Return fire!” Corbec yelled.
He saw three troopers drop, and watched in horror as the metal-tiled
flooring all around ruptured and punctured in a thousand places under the
cascade of enemy shots.
Corbec crawled behind an overturned baggage cart that shook and bucked
as rounds struck it. He tugged out his las-pistol and blasted through the mesh
at indistinct figures on the gallery above.
Trooper Orrin was beside him, firing selective rounds from his lasrifle.
“Orrin?”
“Last chance box, sir,” Orrin answered. Corbec fired another few shots
with his pistol and tugged his remaining clip from his ammo-web, handing it
to Orrin. “Use it well, lad,” he said.
Corbec was pretty sure none of his men had any more than a single clip of
size three left after the initial assault. Loaded, they might do this. They might
hold.
But running empty… it would be a matter of minutes until they were totally
overwhelmed.
Already, he could see two or three of the best men in his squad — Cisky,
Bewl, Roskil, Udir —crouching in cover, heads down, their ability to resist
gone.
They were out of ammo.
Corbec prayed with all his heart that someone, someone in authority…
Ornoff, Van Voytz, maybe even Macaroth himself, would punish the
simpletons in the Munitorium who, for want of a signed docket had hung them
all out to dry.
Corbec crawled forward to the end of the cart. Someone was crying out
for a medic, and Corpsman Munne was darting through the rain of fire to
reach him, aid bag in his hand.
Corbec fired his las-pistol up at the gallery. He had six clips — size twos
- left for the handgun and that was his only arm now he’d given his last rifle
pack to Orrin. There had been a plentiful supply of size two pistol format in
the drogue’s stores. But few of the regular men carried pistols.
He saw Udir firing a solid-ammo revolver at the enemy. A trophy gun,
taken on some past battlefield. A lot of Ghosts cherished captured weapons.
He hoped Udir wasn’t the only man in his squad to have kept his trophy with
him and in working order.
There was a blast of serious firepower from his left. Surch and Loell had
managed to get the light support .30 onto its brass stand and were firing.
Their peals of tracers chased along the upper levels and several
dismembered red figures tumbled down into the air shaft along with sections
of stonework.
Told of the shortage of standard rifle packs before lift-off, Corbec had
wisely assigned troopers Cown and Irvinn to hump extra boxes of .30 shells
for the support weapon. At least his land-hammer had some life in it yet.
Lancing beams of terrible force, bright white and apocalyptic, shafted
down from the massing enemy. A tripod-mounted plasma weapon was
Corbec’s best guess. He saw two of his men blown into flakes of ash by it.
Corbec fired his pistol twice more and then ran, braving the torrent of
indiscriminate fire, back to a marble portico where Muril crouched with the
platoon scout Mkvenner.
“Up there!” Corbec yelled as he skidded in beside them.
“Where?” Muril asked, swinging her long-las.
Muril, a female Vervunhiver with a heroic track record from the Zoican
War, was Corbec’s chosen sniper. Rawne had once asked Corbec why he’d
personally selected Muril for the second platoon — Rawne seemed to have
an unseemly interest in the female soldiers these days — and Corbec had
laughed and told him it was because Muril had a deliciously dirty laugh and
red hair that reminded him of a girl he’d been a fething fool to leave behind
in County Pryze.
Both facts were true, but the real reason was that Corbec believed Muril
to have a shooter’s eye second only to Mad Larkin, and that given a wellmaintained
lasrifle and a generous crosswind, she could pick off anything,
anywhere, clean and true.
“Get the fething heavy weapon!” Corbec urged her. “I see it… gak!” She
took the weapon off her shoulder. “What?” asked Corbec.
“The gakking discharge from it… so bright… just about blinding me
through the scope every time it fires. Screwing the scope’s
photoreceptors…”
Corbec watched in horror as Muril calmly uncoupled the bulky powerscope
from her weapon and aimed it again, by naked eye, down the barrel to
the foreplate.
“You’ll never make it…” he whispered.
“As you Tanith would say, fething watch me—”
Muril fired.
Corbec saw a spray of dust and stone chips burst from the gallery
overhead.
“Yeah, yeah, okay—” Muril growled. “I was just getting my eye in.”
The plasma weapon fired again, blowing a hole out of the lower gallery
and sending Trooper Litz into the hereafter, incinerated.
“I see you,” said Muril, and fired again.
The hot-shot round blew the head off one of the Blood Pact gunners and he
dropped out of sight. Another iron-masked warrior ran over to recrew the
gun as the loader yelled out but Muril had already used her first hit as a
yardstick and she was firing again. Once, twice…
The third round hit the weapon’s bulky power box and a whole section of
the upper gallery exploded in a cone of energy. The floor level blew out, and
thirty or more Blood Pact warriors tumbled to their deaths in an avalanche of
blistered stone.
“I could kiss you,” Corbec murmured.
“Later,” Muril replied, adding a ‘sir’ that was lost in her dirty, triumphant
laughter.
Leaving her to refit her scope, Corbec and Mkvenner ran towards the
stairhead, where the team with the .30 autocannon was doing its level best to
stem the tide of the Blood Pact stormers charging down at them. The stairs
were littered with bodies, body parts and gore.
Loell was winged and knocked down by a stray round, but Cown leapt up
to take over the ammo feed.
The .30 was chattering, its air-cooled barrel glowing red-hot.
Then it jammed.
“Oh feth—” stammered Corbec.
The Blood Pact were all over them.
“Straight silver! Straight silver!” Corbec ordered, and shot the nearest
enemy soldier with his pistol as he drew his warknife. The troops in his
squad pressed forward, those that had power left firing, those that didn’t
using their lasrifles like spears, their warknives locked to the bayonet lugs.
There was a brief, brutal struggle at the stairs. Corbec stabbed and fired,
at one point ending up with a Blood Pact trooper’s iron mask caught around
his knife, the blade through the eye-slit.
He saw Cisky drop, trying to hold in his ripped guts. He saw Mkvenner
halfway up the stairs, firing his last few rounds and killing an enemy with
each one. He saw Udir dubbing the brains out of a Chaos trooper with his
solid-ammo revolver, his last few bullets used up.
A spear of flame ripped up the staircase, consuming the heads of enemy
troops descending on them. Furrian, Corbec’s flamer-man, advanced into the
press, blitzing his drizzles of fire across the screaming foe, driving them
back.
“Go, Furrian! Go, boy!” Corbec bellowed.
Furrian had grown up in the same wood-town as Brostin, and shared his
unhealthy enthusiasm for naked flames. The tanks on his back coughed and
spat liquid promethium that the burner head in his hands ignited into
blossoms of incandescent fire.
Now we’re turning this, thought Corbec, now we’re fething turning this.
A las-round hit Furrian in the head. He twisted and fell, the flamer spurting
weak dribbles of fire across the floor.
Then another las-round hit the tanks on Furrian’s back.
The blast-wash of fire knocked Corbec down. Udir screamed as his
clothes caught fire and he pitched off the staircase a blazing comet of
struggling limbs. Orrin lost his face to the flames, but not his life. He rolled
on the floor, shrieking and squealing through a lip-less mouth, choking on the
melted fat of his own skin.
The Blood Pact poured in. They were met by Mkvenner, Cown and Surch,
the only men still standing at the stairhead after the blast. Corbec struggled
up, gasping, and saw something that would remain in his mind until his dying
day: the most heroic display of last stand fighting he would ever witness.
Mkvenner was by then out of ammo, and Cown had nothing but his Tanith
blade.
Surch was firing a laspistol, and had attached his warknife to a short pole.
Mkvenner swung his lasgun and decapitated the first enemy on him with
the bayonet, las-rounds passing either side of him. He spun the weapon and
smashed a Chaos soldier down with the butt-end before ramming the blade
into the belly of another.
Cown opened the torso of a Blood Pact trooper with a downward slash,
and then punched his knife through the eye-slit of the iron grotesque that
followed. There were enemy troopers surging all round them.
Surch shot two, then pistol-whipped another when his handgun ran dry. He
drove an iron mask back into the face behind it with the dumb end of his
makeshift spear shaft and then sliced it round to cut the right hand off another
of their visored foes.
The warknife flew out of Cown’s hand as a Blood Pact trooper with a
short sword all but tore his arm off. Cown fell down, cursing, and then
grabbed a drum magazine from beside the .30. He used it to beat the
swordsman to death before passing out across him.
Surch killed four more and wounded a fifth before a las-shot hit him in the
knee, dropped him and exposed him to the butt of an enemy gun.
Mkvenner… Mkvenner was terrifying. He was using his lasrifle as a
quarter staff, spinning it and doing equal damage with the stock end as with
the blade. Urlock Gaur’s chosen finest tumbled away from him on either side,
cut, clubbed or smashed over by his heavy boots. Lanky and long, Mkvenner
kicked like a mule and moved like a dancer. Mkoll had once told Corbec that
Mkvenner had been trained in the martial tradition of cwlwhl, the allegedly
lost fighting art of the Tanith wood-warriors. Corbec hadn’t believed it. The
wood-warriors were a myth, even by Tanith’s misty standards.
But as he gazed at Mkvenner then, Corbec could believe it. Mkvenner was
so fast, so steady, so direct. Every hit counted. Every swing, every strike,
every counter-spin, every stab. The wood-warriors of ancient Tanith lore had
fought in the old feudal days, using only spear-staves tipped with single
edged silver blades. They had united Tanith and overthrown the Huhlhwch
Dynasty, paving the way for the modern democratic Tanith city-states.
Mkvenner seemed to Corbec like a figure from the fireside tales of his
childhood. The Nalsheen, the wood-warriors, the fighters of legend, masters
of cwlwhl.
No wonder Mkoll had such a special admiration for Mkvenner.
But even he, even a Nalsheen, couldn’t withstand the assault forever.
Corbec stumbled to join him, firing wildly with his laspistol.
He fell, halfway up the steps.
Then light and dazzling streams of las-fire sliced into the pouring foe from
the top of the stairs.
Sergeant Bray’s platoon had found them, moving along a higher level to
fall on the Blood Pact from the rear. Twenty-five strong, Bray’s squad
quickly slaughtered the enemy and wiped the upper gallery clear.
Bray himself hurried down the steps, pausing only to finish off a couple of
wheezing, twitching Blood Pact fallen, and joined Corbec.
“Just in time, I think,” Bray smiled.
“Yeah,” panted Corbec. The colonel clambered up the stairs and helped
the exhausted, gasping Mkvenner to his feet.
“Brave lad,” Corbec told him. “Brave, brave lad…”
Mkvenner was too breathless to reply.
Supporting Mkvenner, Corbec looked back at Bray.
“Get ready,” he said. He could hear snare drums now, and the ritual
hollering of the enemy as they regrouped in the galleries and halls around
them. “Get your platoon into position. Scare up as many working weapons
and viable ammo as you can from the enemy dead. This is just beginning.”
“D’you ever consider,” murmured Varl, taking a lho-stick out of a little
wooden pocketcase and putting it between his lips, “that we might have been
too good?”
Kolea shrugged. “What do you mean?”
Varl pursed his lips around the lho-stick, but he didn’t light it. He wasn’t
that stupid. It was just a comfort thing, trying to block out just how much he
really wanted a smoke right then. “Well, we sure pushed ahead, didn’t we?
Right into the heart of them, leading the way. And look where it’s got us.”
Kolea knew what the Tanith-born sergeant meant. They were, it seemed,
cut off from the main force now. The last few transmissions received from
Gaunt had spoken about shields or something. Now there was nothing but
ominous vox-hiss. The three platoons under Varl, Kolea and Obel, numbering
some seventy men, were deep in the secondary dome and utterly without
support.
They had moved, cautiously, through block after block of deserted worker
habitats, places that had presumably been looted and abandoned when the
Blood Pact had first taken Cirenholm. Little, tragic pieces of evidence were
all that showed this had once been an Imperial town: a votive aquila from a
household shrine tossed out and smashed in the street; two empty ale bottles
perched on a low wall; a child’s toy lasgun, carved from monofibre; clothes
hanging on a washing line between habs that had been left so long they were
dirty again.
On the end wall of one hab-terrace was a large metal noticeboard that had
once proudly displayed the workforce’s monthly production figures, along
with the names of the star workers. The words “Cirenholm South Mill
Second Shift” were painted in gold leaf along the top, and under that the
Phantine flag and the motto, “Our value to the beloved Emperor”. Someone
had taken a lasgun to the sign, holing it repeatedly, before resorting to a
flamer to burn off most of the paint.
Kolea looked at it sadly. Both it, and the hab area they were in, reminded
him of the low-rent hab-home he had lived in with his family in Vervunhive.
He’d worked Number Seventeen Deep Working for over a decade.
Sometimes, at night, he’d dream of the smell of the ore-face, the rumble of
the drills. Sometimes, he’d dream of the faces of his workmates, Trug Vereas,
Lor Dinda. There’d been a proudly maintained production notice in their
hab-block too. Kolea’s name had appeared on it more than once.
The workers who had lived here had been employed by Cirenholm’s
vapour mill. Kolea wondered where they had gone, how many of them were
still alive. Had the Blood Pact slaughtered the population of Cirenholm’s
domes, or were the poor devils penned up somewhere?
He looked back down the street block. It was broken and ruined, and made
all the more dingy by the dirty yellow light shining down from the girdered
roof. At least when his exhausting shifts down Number Seventeen Deep
Working had been done, he’d risen to daylight and open air, to the sun rising
or setting behind the artificial mountain of Vervunhive.
The Ghosts were prowling down the streets, checking the habs on either
side. Varl had insisted on room-to-room checking, and it made sense. They
hadn’t seen an enemy since they’d first broken into the inner dome areas. The
Blood Pact could be dug in anywhere. This hadn’t turned into the straight
fight they had been expecting. Not at gakking all.
Obel stood with a fireteam at the head of the street, looking out into a
small market yard that had served the worker habs. Shops and businesses
were boarded up or ransacked.
“Look at this,” Obel said, as Kolea approached. He led him into a broken
down store that had once been the paymaster’s office.
Munitorium crests were painted on the walls. Kolea scowled when he saw
them. His opinion of the Imperial Munitorium was miserably low. He didn’t
know a man in their section of the company who had more than one las-cell
remaining now.
Obel opened a drawer in the paymaster’s brass desk, a raised mechanical
lectern, with cable-sockets that showed it had once needed a cybernetic link
to an authorised official in order to operate. The clamps had been broken and
the drawer now rolled free and loose. Kolea was amazed to see the slots
were still full of coins.
“They ransacked the city and they didn’t loot the money?” Kolea
wondered.
Obel picked a coin out of the tray and held it up. It was defaced. Someone
with a makeshift tool, formidable strength and an obsessive amount of time
on their hands, had crushed the coin and obliterated the Emperor’s head. In
its place was a crudely embossed rune. It made him queasy just to look at it.
Obel tossed the coin back. “I guess that says something for the discipline
of these bastards.
They’re more interested in leaving the mark of their maker everywhere
than getting rich.”
Kolea shuddered. Every coin in the tray was the same. It was a strangely
little thing, but somehow more horrifying than the sights of destruction and
desecration he’d seen in his time. The arch-enemy wanted to take the
Imperium and reshape every last little piece of it in his own image.
Outside, Kolea saw the hand-daubed words that the Blood Pact had
painted on the walls. Words he didn’t understand, made of letters he didn’t
know, mostly, but some were written in Low Gothic. Names. “Gaur” and
“Slaith”.
Urlock Gaur, he knew, was the warlord controlling the main enemy
strengths in this sector of the war, a fiend who commanded the loyalty of the
Blood Pact. Gaunt had spoken of him with a mixture of revulsion and respect.
From the recent turn of fortune the Crusade had experienced, it was clear this
Urlock Gaur was a capable commander.
“Slaith” he wasn’t too sure about. The commanding officers had mentioned
several of Gaur’s field commanders, and Kolea was pretty certain Slaith had
been one of them. Perhaps he was the devil behind the war here on Phantine.
Varl wandered up and joined the both of them. “What d’you think, eh?” he
asked them. Obel shrugged.
“We’ve got to be closing on the vapour mill,” Kolea replied. “I say we
push on and take that.”
“Why?”
“Because we’re on our own, and there doesn’t seem a way back. If we’re
going to go down, I say we go down doing something that matters.”
“The mill?” asked Varl.
“Yes, the mill. Think how bad it could be. We could be the only ones left,
and if we are, that means we’ll not be getting out of here in one piece. Let’s
hurt them with what we have left. Let’s take out their main power supply.”
On the far side of the marketplace, Larkin scooted in through the doorway
of another smashed shop, taking care not to kick up the broken glass on the
floor. He held his long-las ready. Baen and Hwlan, the scouts from Varl and
Kolea’s squads, had moved forward with fireteams to clear the west side of
the market, and they’d taken the snipers with them.
Larkin looked round and saw Bragg behind him in the doorway, covering
the line of open street with his heavy cannon. Caill was close by, shouldering
the ammo hoppers for Bragg’s support weapon.
“Anything, Larks?” Bragg hissed.
Larkin shook his head. He stepped back out onto the street Fenix, Garond
and Unkin hurried past, covering each other as they went into the next
tumbled set of premises. Larkin could see Rilke and Nessa, his fellow
snipers, positioned in good cover behind a stack of rotting crates, guarding
the northern approach to the market hub.
Larkin moved on, slightly more comfortable with the idea of Bragg and his
firepower flanking him. His sharp eyes suddenly caught something moving in
a shop that Ifvan and Nour had supposedly already cleared.
“With me, Try,” Larkin hissed. As a rule, Mad Larkin didn’t do brave. He
preferred to lie back, pick his targets and leave the hero stuff to the likes of
Varl and Kolea. But he was getting edgy. He wanted something to shoot at
before he snapped, or before the tension dredged up another of his killer
headaches from the dark sludge at the bottom of his brain.
He licked his lips, looked over at Bragg, who nodded reassuringly over
the heavy barrel of his .50, and kicked in the old wooden door.
Larkin swept his long-las from side to side, peering into the gloom.
Dust swirled up in the sickly light that shafted in through the door and the
holes in the shutters. “Gak you, Tanith. You nearly gave me a cardiac”
“Cuu?”
Trooper Cuu loomed out of the shadows at the back of the shop, his feline
eyes appearing first.
“What the feth are you doing back there?”
“Minding my own business. Why aren’t you minding yours, Tanith?”
Larkin lowered his weapon. “This is my business,” he said, trying to
sound tough, though there was something about Lijah fething Cuu that made
him feel anything but.
Cuu laughed. The grimace put a nasty twist in the scar that ran down his
face. “Okay, there’s enough to share.”
“Enough what?”
Cuu gestured to a small iron strong box that lay open on the shop counter.
“I can’t believe these brain-donors left all this behind, can you?”
Larkin looked into the box. It was half full of coins. Cuu began pocketing
some more and tossed a handful down the dirty counter to Larkin.
Larkin picked one up. It seemed like an Imperial coin, but the faces had
been messed up. Cut reworked, with a clumsy sign he didn’t like.
“Take some,” said Cuu.
“I don’t want any.”
Cuu looked round at him, a nasty sneer on his face. “Don’t you go trying to
cut in on my action and then get high and mighty about it,” he hissed.
“I’m not—” Larkin began.
“Looting is contrary to regimental standing orders,” Bragg said softly. He
was looking in through the doorway behind Larkin.
“Gak me, it’s big dumbo too.”
“Shut up, Cuu,” Bragg said.
“What’s the matter, big dumbo? You going all holy on me like Larkin?”
“Put the coins back,” Bragg said.
“Or what? You and Mad Larks don’t got nothing that can threaten me, sure
as sure.”
“Just put them back,” Bragg said.
Cuu didn’t. He pushed past Larkin, and then stepped past Bragg into the
street. As he did so, he paused, grinning up at the massive support gunner.
“Let’s hope we don’t meet up on some exercise again any time soon, eh, big
dumbo?”
“What does that mean?” asked Bragg.
“Don’t want to cut you with my paint stick again,” said Cuu.
Bragg and Larkin watched him walk away. “What was that about?” asked
Caill, striding up. Bragg shook his head.
“That guy’s a—” Larkin paused. “Someone needs to teach him a lesson,”
he finished. “That’s all I’m saying.”
FIVE
An invisible plume of hard, cold air was tearing at him. Somewhere far
below in the amber darkness, he could here a steady, dreadful “whup! whup!
whup!”, the sound of beating fan blades.
Milo’s fingers were going stiff. The climbing cable cut into his palms,
even though he was sure he was holding it the way Vadim had shown him.
“Left!” hissed a voice. “Milo! Left! Move your feet left!”
Milo floundered around, trying not to kick the hollow metal walls of the
great vent, but still making what seemed to him was the sound of heavy sacks
of root vegetables bouncing down a tin chute.
“Left! For gale’s sake! There’s a rim right there!”
Milo’s left foot found the rim and he eased his right over on to it.
“Vadim?” he gasped.
“You’re there. Now let go of the cable with your left hand.”
“But—”
“Gakking do it! Let go and reach out. There’s a bulkhead right beside you.”
Milo was perspiring so hard now he felt like his whole skin might just slip
off. He couldn’t see anything except the darkness, couldn’t feel anything
except the cable biting into his lands and the sill under his toes, and couldn’t
hear anything except his own frantic breathing and the threatening “whup!
whup! whup!” from below.
That, and the persistent voice. “Milo! Now!”
He reached out, and his fingers found reassuringly solid metal.
“Now slide round. Slide round to me… that’s it.”
Milo tried, but his balance was shot. He lunged as he started to fall.
“Feth!”
Strong hands grabbed him and dragged him over the edge of a hard metal
frame.
“Got you! I got you! You’re down!”
Milo rolled on his back, panting, and saw Vadim looking own at him in the
sub-light. The Verghastite was smiling. “Good job, Milo.”
“Feth… really?”
Vadim helped him up. “That’s no easy climb. I wouldn’t have wished it on
many of the guys I used to roof with. Damn sight more sheer than I was
expecting, and gakking few grab-holds. Not to mention that in-rush. You feel
it?”
Milo nodded. He looked back through the inspection plate Vadim had
hauled him in through. Below, far below, now he lad a better angle, he could
see the massive turning blades of the fan. Whup! Whup! Whup! “Feth—” he
breathed. He looked back. “Where’s Bonin?”
“Here,” said the scout, emerging from the shadows. Bonin and Vadim had
gone down first. “Wasn’t easy, was it?” Bonin asked, as if it had been a walk
in the fields.
Vadim nudged Milo aside and reached into the vent again, pulling out
Lillo, whose face was pink and sweaty with fear and exertion.
“Never again…” Lillo murmured, crouching down to rest and wiping his
brow.
“I don’t think we should bring anyone else down,” Vadim said to Bonin.
“It’s taking too long.” Bonin nodded and activated his micro-bead. “You hear
me, Shoggy?”
“Go ahead. Are you down?”
“Yeah, all four of us. Rest of you stay put for now. It’s no easy ride. We’ll
scope around and see if we can’t find a proper roof access to let you in by.”
“Understood. Don’t take too long.”
The four Ghosts checked their lasrifles and unwrapped their camo-cloaks.
They were inside Cirenholm’s vapour mill now, moving along the gantries
and catwalks like shadows. The thunderous purring of the main turbines
covered the slight sounds they made as they spread out.
Bonin gestured them into cover, then waved Vadim and Milo forward.
They had reached a main deck area suspended over the primary drums of the
turbines. The air was damp and smelled of oil and burned dust.
Lillo crossed the other way at Bonin’s signal. When he was in place,
Bonin started forward again.
He spotted a skeletal stairwell that looked promising. Roof access,
perhaps.
Bonin got in cover behind a bulkhead and signalled the others forward.
Lillo drew up to flank the scout, and Vadim and Milo hurried past, making for
the end of the deck walkway.
Milo dropped again, but Vadim moved on. Milo cursed silently. The
Verghastite had moved too far and broken rhythm of the smooth, bounding
cover they were setting.
“Vadim!” he hissed over his link.
Vadim heard him and stopped, realising he had gone too far. He looked for
good cover and hurried round into the mouth of an airlock.
The airlock hatch suddenly opened.
Light flooded out.
Vadim turned and found himself face to face with six Blood Pact warriors.
In the gloom, Milo saw the abruptly spreading patch of light shine out from
the airlock where Vadim had gone to ground.
A moment later, Vadim flew into view, diving frantically headlong, firing
his lasrifle behind him with one hand.
A burst of answering las-fire exploded out after him. Milo saw the
gleaming red bolts sizzling in the air, spanking off the grille deck and a hoist
assembly, and snapping the handrail of the deck. He wasn’t sure where
Vadim had ended up, or if he’d been hit.
“Vadim? Vadim?”
Several figures moved out of the airlock onto the deck, fast and proficient
in a combat spread. Milo glimpsed red battle-dress, gleaming crimson
helmets, the glint of black ammo-webbing, and dark faces that looked like
they had been twisted into tortured expressions of pain. Two of them fired
from the hatchway, down the length of the deck, providing protective fire for
the others who ran out into the open.
Milo raised his weapon, but Bonin’s terse voice came over the micro-link.
“Milo! Hold fire and stay low! Lillo… open up from where you are!”
Milo looked behind him. Lillo was further back down the deck than either
himself or Bonin. The Verghastite started firing on semi-auto, squirting quick
bursts of fire at the figures emerging from the airlock. The shots streamed
down the deckway past Milo at hip height.
The enemy troops immediately focused their attention on Lillo, firing at
him and moving down the deck towards him, hugging cover. Milo could see
Bonin’s simple but inspired tactic at once. Lillo was drawing the enemy out,
stringing them between Milo and Bonin’s firing positions.
“Wait… Wait…” Bonin murmured.
The enemy were closer now. Milo could see their faces were in fact metal
masks, cruel and rapacious. He could smell the stink of their sweat and
unwashed clothes. These have to be Blood Pact he thought.
“Wait…”
Milo was crouched so low his legs were beginning to cramp. His skin
crawled. He tightened his grip on his lasrifle. Laser bolts criss-crossed the
air around him — blue-white from Lillo’s Imperial weapon, flame-red from
the Chaos guns.
“Now!”
Milo swept round and fired. His ripple of shots punched into a bulkhead,
missing the Blood Pact trooper who hunched against it. The masked warrior
whipped around at the now close source of opposition and Milo corrected
his hasty aim, putting two rounds into the enemy’s face.
Bonin had opened up too, deftly cutting down two of the Blood Pact as
they were crossing for better cover and a better angle on Lillo.
A sudden silence. By Milo’s reckoning, there were still three of them left.
He could hear one creeping slowly towards the row of fuel drums concealing
Bonin, but his own cover blocked his view. Milo got down and slowly
pulled himself round on his belly. He could almost see his target. A shadow
on the deck showed that the trooper was almost on top of Bonin.
Milo lunged out of cover, firing twice. He hit the Blood Pact trooper and
sent him tumbling over, wildly firing the full-auto burst he had been saving
for Bonin.
There was a fierce cry. Milo looked round to see another of the Blood
Pact charging him, shooting. Las-rounds exploded off the plating behind him,
nicking the stock of Milo’s weapon and burning through his left sleeve.
Bonin appeared out of nowhere, leaping off the barrels full length. He
smashed into the charging foe, the impact carrying them both over hard into
the deck’s handrail. The scout threw a savage uppercut, and his silver
warknife was clenched in his punching fist. Screaming, the enemy clutched
his neck and face and fell backwards off the deck.
A single las-shot rang out. The last Blood Pact trooper had been running
back for the airlock. Lillo had cut him down with one, well-judged round.
Lillo hurried forward. “Check the airlock,” Bonin told him, wiping his
blade clean before sheathing it.
“Thanks,” said Milo. “I thought he’d got me.”
“Forget it,” smiled Bonin. “I’d never have got that one sneaking up on
me.”
They joined Lillo at the airlock. “Think we got them all. This one’s an
officer, I think.” He kicked the body of the one he had brought down in flight.
“Where’s Vadim?” Milo asked.
They looked round. Desperate for cover, Vadim had thrown himself out of
the airlock hatchway. It seemed to all three of them that in his panic, Vadim
had gone clean off the edge of the deck into space.
“Hey!”
Milo got down and looked over the rail. Vadim was swinging by one hand
from one of the deck’s support members about five metres down. “Feth!”
said Milo. “Get a rope!”
Sonin searched the bodies of the dead Blood Pact, and bund a ring of digital
keys in the pocket of the officer’s coat.
“Sorry,” Vadim said to everyone, now back on the deck. “Got a bit ahead
of myself.”
Bonin said nothing. He didn’t have to. Vadim knew his mistake.
They approached the massive metal staircase and followed t up into the
roof space. The captured keys let them through locked cage doors one by one.
It would have taken them tours to cut or blow their way through.
At the top of the stairwell there was a greasy metal platform with a ladder
up to a ceiling hatch. Bonin climbed up and tried the keys until he found one
that disengaged the blast-proof lock on the hatch. “Hoods,” he advised, and
all four of them struggled back into their rebreathers before he opened the
hatch. Orange hazard lights began spinning and flashing around the platform
as the hatch opened to the night and freezing air billowed in. “Someone’s
going to notice this,” Lillo said. There was no helping it. Time was against
them. The team they’d taken out would be missed soon anyway.
Bonin climbed out onto the roof and voxed to Domor and the main force. It
took about fifteen minutes for them to struggle up through the mill’s
superstructure and get into the hatch. Bonin sent the first few troopers to
arrive down the stairwell with Milo and Lillo to secure the base and the
access to the deck. As soon as the last man was inside, Bonin closed and
relocked the hatch. The hazard flashers shut down.
Down on the deck, those troopers — like Seena and Arilla — who had
come through the drop crash minus weapons helped themselves to the
battered, old-pattern lascarbines belonging to the Blood Pact. Avoiding the
airlock, they continued on down the stairwell until they reached the main
floor of the turbine chamber. It was dark and oily, with a low-level smog of
exhaust smoke, but the darkness and the noise swallowed them up. Mkeller
and Bonin, working from the map, snaked them through the sump levels of the
mill, between the turbine frames, under walkframes, over coils of
pressurised pipes. Moisture dripped down, and unwholesome insect vermin
scuttled in the corners.
Somewhere high above them, light shone out. The Ghosts froze. Light from
an opened hatch or airlock spread out across one of the upper catwalks, and
they saw a line of figures hurrying along the walk onto a raised deck level. A
moment later, and more light appeared. Another group, more soldiers, lamps
bobbing as they crossed an even higher walkway, moving to support the first.
Bonin and Milo had dumped the Blood Pact dead off the deck into the
darkness of the sump, but there had been no disguising the las-damage to the
deck area.
Once it seemed safe to move again, they filed along the narrow
companionways of the sump, and reached an inner hatch that opened with a
turn of the digital keys.
In fireteam formations now, Jagdea protected in one of the middle groups,
they went through into a main service corridor, round in cross-section with
heavy girder ribs. Dull blue lights glowed out of mesh boxes along the
backbone of the roof.
The corridor wound away, passing junctions, crossways, stairwells and
elevator hatches. Haller grew increasingly uncomfortable, and he could see it
in the faces of the Verghastites too. It was a maze. They’d turned so many
times, he wasn’t even sure of basic compass orientation anymore. But the
Tanith seemed confident. Corbec had once told Haller that the Tanith couldn’t
get lost. It wasn’t in their genes, he reckoned. Something to do with the
perpetually mystifying pathways of that homeworld forest they were forever
banging on about.
Now he believed it. Bonin, who like all the Tanith scouts had a grim-set
face that never seemed to find much to be cheerful about, didn’t even consult
the map anymore. He paused occasionally to check stencilled wall signs, and
once backed them up and rerouted them up a level via a stairwell. But his
confidence never wavered.
They came at last to a small side hall that seemed particularly dingy and
long out of use. They were, by Haller’s estimation, in the very basement
levels of the city dome, lower even than the mill sump levels. Racks of old,
cob-webbed work coveralls and crates of surplus industrial equipment had
been stacked there out of the way. Most of the rooflights had gone. There was
a door at the far end. A metal hatch, painted blue with a flaking white serial
stencil.
Bonin paused, and looked over at Mkeller. The other scout, an older man
with greying hair shaved in close to the sides of his head, returned the look
with a nod.
“What is this?” whispered Haller.
“Rear service access to the mill’s main control chamber.”
“Are you sure?”
“I don’t need to open the door to prove it’s the rear service access to the
mill’s main control chamber, if that’s what you mean, sir.”
“Okay, okay…” Haller glanced at Domor. “What do you think?”
“I think it’s the closest thing to a target that we’re going to get. Unless
you’d care to hide in these sub-basements until, oh, I don’t know… the end of
time?”
Haller smiled. “Point taken. And as our beloved colonel-commissar is so
fond of saying… do you want to live forever?”
The blast ripped down the length of the stateroom, shredding the painted
wood panelling, dashing up the polished floor tiles and tearing one of the
crystal chandeliers off the roof. The chandelier crashed and rolled like a
felled, crystal tree. Its twin wilted and swayed from the ceiling.
The wispy blue smoke began to clear.
Gaunt blinked away the tears that the smoke had welled up, and coughed to
clear his throat. He looked around.
Though some were brushing litter off themselves, the Ghosts in his squad
seemed to have weathered the powerful explosion.
“Form and point, by threes. Let’s go!” Gaunt growled over his micro-bead.
“Soric, watch our behinds.”
“Read you, sir,” crackled Soric’s reply. His squad, along with those of
Theiss, Ewler and Skerral, were dug in at their heels, holding off the
mounting assaults of the Blood Pact.
Drawing his sword and powering it up, Gaunt ran forward with Derin and
Beltayn, following the lead team of Caober, Wersun and Starck. Debris
crunched underfoot. Gaunt’s boot caught a crystal twig of chandelier and it
went tinkling away across the dust.
Before he’d even reached the grand doorway at the end, he heard Caober’s
snarl of frustration and knew what it meant. The shield was still intact.
They’d brought down the entire frontice of the doorway, frame and all, with
the combined tube charges and det-sticks of the entire platoon and still the
energy screen fizzled at them, untroubled.
“Sir?” asked Beltayn.
Gaunt thought fast. There had been a protocol for retiring — Tactician
Biota had coded it “Action Blue Magus”—but there was no point giving that
signal. They were penned into the outer levels of the secondary dome by the
shield wall to one side and the Blood Pact to the other. There was nowhere
to retire to, and no hope of calling up an evac. Even if the drop fleet had
returned to the drogue and refuelled, as they were supposed to do, the enemy
held the DZ now, the only viable landing zone.
Biota had expected them to win, Gaunt thought. Dammit, he had expected
them to win. Cirenholm should have been tough, but not this fething tough.
They had seriously underestimated the resolve and strategic strength of the
Blood Part.
Gaunt took the mic from Beltayn.
“One to close units, by mark 6903. Shield is not breached. Repeat not
breached. Stand by.”
He consulted his data-slate chart, as Beltayn hurried to import updated
troop positions from his vox-linked auspex. It was tight. Too tight. The
Ghosts were entirely hemmed in by the enemy, and they were slowly being
squeezed to death against the shield line.
With virtually no room to play with, Gaunt knew he had to make the best of
what defensive positions he had.
“This is one,” Gaunt continued. “Soric, Theiss, Skerral, hold your line.
Ewler, angle west. The chart shows a service well two hundred metres to
your right. I want it blocked and covered. Maroy, hold and provide
protective fire for Ewler’s move. Confirm.”
They did so in a rapid stutter of overlapped responses.
“One, further… Burone, you hear me?”
“Sir!”
“What’s it like there?”
“Low intensity at present, sir. I think they’re trying to flank us.”
“Understood. Try not to lose any more ground. Fall back no further than
junction hall 462.”
“Four six two, confirmed.”
“Tarnash, Mkfin, Mkoll. Try to spread south to the vestibule at 717.
There’s a series of chambers there that look like they could be held.”
“Understood, sir,” replied Mkfin.
“Read you, one,” said Mkoll.
“Tarnash? This is one. Confirm.”
Crackling noise.
“Tarnash?”
Gaunt looked at Beltayn, who was adjusting the tuning dial. The harried
vox-officer shook his head. “One, twenty?”
“Go ahead, one.”
“Soric, Tarnash may be down, which means there may be a dangerous hole
in your left flank.”
“We stand advised, sir.”
“Mkendrick, Adare… press your gain to the right. Soric needs the cover.”
“Understood, sir. It’s fething hot this way,” Adare responded.
“Do your best. Wix, you still holding that loading dock?”
“Down to our last dregs of ammo, sir. We can give you ten minutes’
resistance at best before it comes down to fists and blades.”
“Selective five, Wix. Use your damn tube charges, if you have to.”
A transmission cut across abruptly. “Ten-fifty, one!”
“Go ahead, Indrimmo.”
The Verghastite’s voice was frantic. Gaunt could hear rat-ding autofire
over the link. “We’re out! My squad is out! Count zero on all las! Gak!
They’re on all sides now, we—”
“Indrimmo! Indrimmo! One, ten-fifty!”
“Channel’s dead, sir,” murmured Beltayn.
Gaunt looked desperately back at the shield, the real enemy. It was denying
him every possibility of constructing a workable defence. For a moment, he
considered striking at the cursed shield with his power sword, but he knew
that was no way to finish the life of Heironymo Sondar’s noble weapon.
“Ideas?” he asked Caober.
The scout shook his head. “All I figure is this shield system must be
running off the city power supply. It must be sucking up a feth of a lot of juice
to stay this coherent.”
Gaunt had worked that much out. If only he could reach the spearhead,
Varl, Obel and Kolea… if they were still alive. Maybe they could hit in as
far as the vapour mill and…
No. That was just wishful thinking. If the three squads of the spearhead
were still alive, they’d be fighting for their lives now, alone in the heart of
the enemy-held dome. Even if the shields hadn’t been blocking their voxbroadcasts
and he could talk to them, hoping they could storm the mill was
futile.
Gaunt snapped round from his reverie, as what seemed like a grenade
blast ruptured in across the stateroom from the left. Before the smoke had
even cleared, he saw red-dad figures moving through the breach in the
shattered wall.
The Imperial maps of Cirenholm were good, but the Blood Pact owned the
turf, and knew every last vent chute and sub-basement. They’d got into the
stateroom wall space somehow, behind the rearguard of Soric and the rest.
And they were storming out into the middle of his strung-out platoon.
He didn’t have to issue instructions. His men reacted instinctively, even as
some of them were cut down by the initial firing. Wersun ran forward,
clipped twice by las-rounds, firing tight bursts that knocked at least three of
the Blood Part infantry off their feet. Caober and Derin went in head to head,
stabbing with fixed blades and loosing random shots.
Vanette, Myska, Lyse and Neith leapt up and chattered their shots into the
wall-breach. Myska was hit in the left forearm and fell over but was back on
his feet again almost at once, using a soot-streaked jardiniere as a rest for his
weapon now he was firing one-handed.
Starck fell, hit in the throat. Lossa was caught in the forehead by a lasround,
stumbled blindly holding his head, and then had his legs shot out from
under him by two Blood Part at close range.
Those enemy soldiers both died quickly as successive rounds from
Gaunt’s bolt pistol burst their torsos.
Gaunt leapt over Wersun, who was now lying in a pool of blood, panting,
and sliced his sword at the next black metal grotesque he saw.
The blue-glow of the blade glimmered in the air and was followed by a
sharp stench of burnt blood. There was another to his left, raising a
lascarbine that was quickly cut in half, along with the forearms clutching it.
Gaunt recoiled, the power-blade deflecting a las-round, and ran at the next
group of enemies. Three of them, stumbling through the smoke-filled gap in
the wall. One doubled over, hit by Derin’s shots. Gaunt impaled another on
his blade and slammed bodily into the third. That one tried to fire, but Gaunt
dragged the sword and the heavy corpse draped on it absorbed the shots at
point blank range. Gaunt punched the muzzle of his bolt pistol into the black
visor and fired.
It was feral confusion now. Many of his Ghosts were dry. They fell into the
mob of Blood Part pressing through the breach with blades, fists or lasrifles
swung like clubs.
A shot crisped through the sleeve of his jacket. Gaunt fired again, blowing
a figure back into his comrades so they all fell like bowling pins. He fired
again, but there was nothing now except a dull clack.
He was out. There was no time to change bolt dips.
He scythed with the power sword, severing bayonets, gun-muzzles and
wrists. Two of the Chaos filth jumped on him, trying to bring him down. One
got too near to his sword and tumbled off, eviscerated.
The other went limp suddenly, and Caober pulled him away, his straight
silver in his hand.
Gaunt rose. Almost immediately, Beltayn cannoned into him and dragged
him down again.
There was the chugging roar of a .30, and then the whoosh of a flamer.
Bool and Mkan, manning the support weapon, and Nitorri, the squad’s flametrooper,
had at last been able to move up from their positions at the end of the
stateroom and address the assault. Gaunt crawled back to cover as the heavy
cannon and the flames drove the enemy back into the wall.
Nitorri’s left shoulder sprayed blood as a parting shot struck him. He
slumped over. Lyse, one of the female Verghastites, a veteran of the
Vervunhive Civil Defence Cadre, ran forward, knelt by Nitorri’s shuddering
body, and scooped up the earner’s hose. She swept it back and forth across
the breach, igniting the panelwork and combusting the last two Blood Pact
troopers who had dared to linger.
Gaunt wished he had a few more tube charges left.
“Cover that hole!” he yelled at the crew of the .30. “You too, Trooper
Lyse. Good work.”
“Sir! Commissar Gaunt sir!”
“Beltayn?”
The vox-officer held out his headset urgently. “Sir,” he said. “It’s Scout
Trooper Bonin.”
“Say again, sir! I can barely hear you!” Bonin kept the headset pressed to his
ear and looked over with a desperate shrug to Nirriam, who was trying to
adjust the big vox-unit.
There was another brief snatch of Gaunt’s voice.
“Stand by, sir. We’ll try and raise you on another channel.”
Bonin cut the link. “Can you boost it?” he asked Nirriam. Nirriam raised
his eyebrows, like a man who’d just been asked to inflate a drogue with lungpower.
“I dunno,” said the Verghastite. A basic infantryman, Nirriam had once
done a secondary skills course in vox use, which meant he was the best
qualified operator Haller and Domor’s sections could rustle up. And that
wasn’t saying much.
Nirriam pulled up a metal-framed operator’s chair and perched on it as he
tried to familiarise himself with the vox unit. It was the mill control’s main
communication desk, so old it was almost obsolete. Time and use had worn
all the switch and dial labels blank. It was like some fiendish, inscrutable
puzzle.
Bonin waited impatiently, and glanced around the room. The chamber was
a fan vault, two storeys high, and provided workstation positions for the
mill’s thirty tech-priests. Everything was finished in brass, with shiny cream
enamel coating the extensive pipework running up and down the walls. The
floor was paved in grubby green ceramic tiles. It had a faded air of elegance,
a relic of a more sophisticated industrial age.
There were four exit points: a hatch on the upper gallery overlooking the
main chamber and three on the ground floor, including the old service access
they had come in through. Domor had spread the squads out to cover them all.
Lillo, Ezlan and Milo were dragging the corpses into a corner.
There had been five adepts on duty, along with two Blood Pact sentries
and an officer with a silver grotesque and shabby gold fragging down his
tunic front. Bonin and Mkeller hadn’t been in the mood for subtlety. Most of
the shooting was done by the time the main body of the party got into the
chamber.
Commander Jagdea was looking dubiously at the dead and the blood
decorating the tiles. Milo had taken it to be disgust at first but she was a
warrior too, and had undoubtedly seen her fair share of death.
Her face pale with pain from her injury, she had looked at Bonin angrily.
“We could have questioned them.”
“We could.”
“But you killed them.”
“It was safer.” Bonin had left it at that and moved away.
Now the wisdom of her remarks was chafing at him. If they’d kept the
adepts alive — adepts, indeed, who may have been loyal Imperial citizens
working under duress — one of them might have been able to operate the
control room’s vox-unit.
No point regretting that now, Bonin thought. He silently prayed his lucky
star was still with him. “Nirriam?”
“Give me a chance, Bonin.”
“Come on—”
“Gakking do it yourself!” the Verghastite complained, now down under the
desk unplugging the switch cables one by one to blow on them.
Domor came over, pausing to check on Dremmond, Guthrie and Arilla
who sat on the floor leaning against the wall, resting. Fayner was checking
their wounds.
“Anything?” Domor asked.
Bonin made an off-hand gesture in the direction of Nirriam. “He’s working
on it,” he said.
“Try it now!” Nirriam snorted. Bonin was certain the sentence had actually
finished with a silent “gak-face”.
Bonin put the headset back on and keyed the mic.
“Thirty-two, one. Thirty-two, one, do you read?”
Nirriam leaned past him and gently turned a dial, as if it might actually do
some good.
Bonin was surprised to find it did.
“—irty-two. One, thirty-two. You’re faint but audible. Do you read?”
“Thirty-two, one. We hear you. Messy channel, but it’s the best we can
do.”
“There’s serious void shield activity in the dome, and it’s blocking the
signals. Micro-beads are down. Are you getting through on your main vox?”
“Negative. We’re using a captured system. Must have enough power to
beat the interference.”
As if to prove it wasn’t, there was a sudden yowl of trash noise before
Gaunt’s voice continued.
“…were dead. Report location.”
“Say again, one.”
“We thought you were dead. I was told your drop had gone down in the
run. What’s your situation and location?”
“Long story, one. Our drop did go in, but Haller and Domor got clear with
about thirty bodies. Minimal casualties on the survivors. We’re inside the—”
Bonin paused. He had suddenly realised that the channel might not be
anything like secure.
“One thirty-two. Repeat last.”
Bonin took out his crumpled map. “Thirty-two, one. We’re… around about
6355.”
There was a long pause. The vox-speakers whined and hissed.
“One, thirty-two. Standby.”
Gaunt spread his map out on the top of a damaged side table. His gloves
were bloody, and left brown smears on the thin paper where he flattened it.
Six three five five. 6355. There was no fething 6355 on the chart. But
Bonin had said “around about”…
Gaunt reversed the sequence. 5536. Which meant…
The mill. The main control room of the vapour mill.
Feth!
Gaunt looked round at Beltayn and took the mic from him.
“One, thirty-two. We’re blocked in by an enemy shield wall ignited along
marker 48:00. It’s sourcing power from the main city supply. We need that
supply cut, and fast if we’re going to survive much past the next quarter hour.
Do you understand?”
“Thirty-two, one. Very clear, sir. I’ll see what we can do. Standby.”
Gaunt could feel his pulse rating. Had the Ghosts just been cut the luckiest
fething break in Imperial combat history? He realised he had become so
resigned to defeat and death in the last few minutes that the idea they could
still turn this around genuinely shook him.
He could suddenly taste victory. He could see its shadow, feel its heat.
He suddenly remembered the things that made the burden of command and
the grind of service in the Emperor’s devoted Guard worthwhile.
There was a chance. Could he trust it? Making best use of it would require
him to trust it, but if that trust was misplaced, his men would be slaughtered
even more swiftly and efficiently than before.
And then he remembered Zweil. The old ayatani, stopping him outside the
drogue Nimbus’s Blessing Chapel.
Let me look in your eyes, tell you to kill or be killed, and make the sign of
the aquila at least.
Gaunt felt a sudden gnawing in his gut. He realised it was fear. Fear of the
unknown and the unknowable. Fear of the supernatural that lurked beyond the
galaxy he was familiar with.
Zweil had said trust Bonin.
How could he have known? How could he have seen…
But the old priest’s words echoed in his head, rising from holy depths to
make themselves heard above the aftershock of the hours of combat that had
flooded his conscious mind.
The saint herself, the beati, told me… you must trust Bonin.
He’d dismissed it at the time. He had barely remembered it as they
approached the DZ, tense and busting fit to scream. It had gone from his head
during the rush of the drop and the ever thicker combat that had followed.
But now it was there. Zweil. In his head. Advising him. Giving him the key
to victory.
He had to trust it.
Gaunt grabbed the vox-mic from his waiting corn-officer and began to
order a series of retreats, across the board, to all the squads he could reach.
Dismayed complaints came in from many units, especially from Corbec,
Hark and Soric. Gaunt shouted them down, aware that Beltayn was staring at
him as if he was mad.
He checked the chart, surveying the spaces and chambers currently
inaccessible behind the shield wall. He ordered all his men to pull back
against the shield, with nowhere to run, and gave them quick instructions of
how to deploy once they were able to move again.
Something in his tone and his confidence shut them up. They listened.
Upwards of a hundred squad officers, suddenly seeing a chance to live and
to win.
“Fall back, hold on, and pray. When I give the word, follow your
deployment orders immediately.”
The sound of explosions rocked down the length of the stateroom. Sensing
a change in the dispersal of the Ghosts, the Blood Pact had renewed their
assaults, bringing up heavy support weapons and seeding grenades.
Gaunt shouted orders to his squad. All we have to do is hold them, he
thought. And all I have to do is trust Bonin.
SIX
“Ideas?” Bonin asked. He was answered by sighs and shaken heads.
“They might have known,” Jagdea said quietly, looking over at the heap of
corpses in the corner.
Fething woman! Bonin thought he might strike her. He detested an “I told
you so”. He looked around the control room, trying to perceive the mysteries
of the vast mechanism. He felt like a child. It was hopeless. Dial needles
quivered mysteriously, gauges glowed inscrutably, levers and switches
seemed to be set “just so”. He was a soldier, not a fething tech-priest. He had
no idea how to shut down a vapour mill.
“If we had tube charges, we could blow it,” said Ezlan.
“If we had tube charges,” Lillo echoed.
“Then what?” Haller groaned. He strode over to the nearest workstation
and pulled a brass lever. There was absolutely no perceptible change in
anything. He shrugged.
“If—” Milo began.
“If what?” said about ten people at once.
“If the Blood Pact rigged their shields into the main supply, it would be
non-standard. I mean, cut in, intrusive. You know, like when we hike a
breaker cable in to wire a door release.”
Domor nodded.
“I hear Milo,” said Vadim. “If they hooked it in, it would look jury-rigged.
We might be able to recognise it.”
Bonin had been considering a desperate ploy of connecting all the power
cells they had and forcing an overload. In the light of Milo’s more subtle
idea, he put the notion of an improvised bomb to the back of his mind.
“Let’s try then, shall we?” he asked. Then he paused. Haller and Domor,
sergeants both, were actually in charge here. He had overstepped the line. He
glanced at them, embarrassed.
“Hey, I’m with Bonin,” Domor said.
“He’s got my vote,” said Haller.
“Then… go!” Bonin exclaimed.
The Ghost survivors of drop 2K scurried off in every direction as if they’d
all been simultaneously slapped on the behinds. Inspection panels were
prised off, service hatches pulled out, lamp packs shone up under
workstations.
The only ones not searching were the sentries: Seena at the upper door,
Mkeller and Lwlyn at the lower main doors and Caes, with Dremmond’s
flamer, at the service hatch.
Bonin came out from under a work console and turned his attention to a
wall plate. The wing nuts were stiff, and he had to use the pommel of his
warknife like a mallet to move them.
Beside him, Vadim was investigating the guts of a relay position, up to his
wrists in bunches of wires.
“Of course,” Vadim said cheerfully, “we could just turn every dial and
switch to zero.”
“I thought of that. I also thought we could simply shoot the living feth out
of everything in sight.”
“Might work,” Vadim sighed.
“Can I just say—” said a voice behind them. Bonin glanced round. It was
Jagdea, her slung arm looking more uncomfortable than ever.
“What, commander?”
“I’m an aviator so I don’t know much about vapour mills, but I think I
know a little more than you, having lived on Phantine all my life. The mill is
a gas generator. It produces billions of litres of gas energy under extreme
pressure. The priesthood that maintains the Phantine mills are privy to
thousands of years of lore and knowledge as to their governance.”
“And your point… because I’m sure you have one somewhere,” said
Bonin, finally forcing the wall plate off.
“It’s an ancient system, working under millions… I don’t know… billions
of tonnes of pressure. Blow it up, shoot it up, shut it down… whatever… it’s
likely that the system will simply explode without expert control. And if this
vapour mill explodes… well, I don’t think there’ll be a Cirenholm left for the
taking.”
“Okay,” said Bonin, with false sweetness, “Thanks for that.” He turned to
resume his work. Damn woman was going to get his knife in her back if she
didn’t shut up. He knew she didn’t like him. Damn woman.
Damn woman had a point. They were playing around, fiddling in
ignorance, with a power system that kept an entire city alive. That was real
power. Jagdea was right. If they got this wrong, there wouldn’t be anything
left of Cirenholm except a smouldering mountain peak.
“Feth!” Bonin cursed at the thought.
“What?” said Jagdea from behind him.
“Nothing. Nothing.”
“Of course,” Jagdea continued, “if that boy was correct—”
“Milo.”
“What?”
“Trooper Brin Milo.”
“Okay. If Milo was correct, and the enemy has wired their shields into the
mill systems, isn’t it likely they did it at source in the main turbine halls
rather than down here in the control room?”
Bonin dropped the wall plate with a clang and rose, turning to face her.
“Yes. Yes it is. Very likely. But we’re here and we’re trying our damnedest.
We can’t go back now, because the foe is everywhere. So we work with what
we have. Have you any other comments to make, because, if you haven’t
quite frankly I’d love it if you shut up now and helped us look. You’re really
pissing me off.”
She looked startled.
“Oh. Well. All right. What would you like me to do?”
Bonin glanced about. “Over there. Between Nirriam and Guthrie. Take a
look at that desk, if you’d be so kind.”
“Of course,” she said, and hurried over to it.
“Way to go with the lady, Bonin,” laughed Vadim.
“Shut the feth up,” said Bonin.
“Sarge! Sarge!” They all heard Seena sing out.
“What?” replied Haller, looking up from a maintenance vent he had been
buried to his shoulders in.
Seena was up on the gallery, watching the upper doorway.
“We’ve got company.” Her voice was sweetly sing-song.
What it meant was anything but.
“Come on! Come on!” Corbec was yelling, standing up and waving his arms
despite the enemy crossfire splashing all around. The Ghosts in his squad,
along with Bray’s troops, dashed back through the hatchway, a rain of fire
dropping around them.
Irvinn stumbled, and Corbec dragged him through the hatch by the scruff of
his neck. “Is the shield down, chief?” he babbled. “Not yet, son.”
“But Commissar Gaunt said it would be! He said it would be!”
“I know.”
“If the shield isn’t down, we’re backing ourselves into a trap, chief, we
—”
Corbec cuffed the young trooper around the side of the head. “Gaunt’ll
come through. That’s what he does. He’ll come through and we’ll live! Now
get in there and take your position!”
Irvinn scrambled on.
Corbec looked back in time to see two more Ghosts fall on their way to
the hatch. One was Widden, whose body was struck so hard by .50 fire it
was deformed completely. The other was Muril. She was hit and thrown in a
cartwheel that ended with her lying on her face.
“No!” Corbec roared.
“Colm! Wait!” Sergeant Bray yelled.
“Get them back in, Bray, get them back in!” Corbec howled, running out
from the hatchway towards Muril. Las-fire ripped up the deck around him,
filling the air with a fog of atomised tiles.
Somehow, he reached Muril. He rolled her over. Her face was white with
dust and dotted with blood that soaked into the dust like ink into clean
blotting paper. Her eyelids flickered.
“Come on, girl! We’re going!” he shouted. “C-colonel—”
He looked her over, and saw the wound in her upper thigh. Bad, but
survivable. He hoisted her onto his shoulders.
One of his legs gave way suddenly and they both fell over into the dust,
kicking up a serene cloud of white mist.
Everything seemed to slow down. Everything seemed to go quiet.
Corbec saw the enemy las-rounds swirling through the dust in what
seemed like slow motion; crackling barbs of red light, eddying wakes behind
them in the dust; the oozingly slow on-off flashes of explosions; the strobe of
tracers; the drops of bright red blood falling from Muril onto the floor,
making soft craters in the dust.
He lifted her up again, and ran, but it was hard work. His leg didn’t want
to move.
There was a sudden pain in his back, and then another really biting lance
of agony through his left shin.
He toppled in through the hatchway, into Bray’s arms. Merrt and Bewl ran
forward, mouths open, managing to catch Muril before she hit the ground.
“Medic! Medic!” Bray was yelling.
Corbec realised he couldn’t move. Everything felt strangely warm and
soft. He lay on his back, looking at the panelled roof.
It seemed to slide up and away from him. The last thing he heard was Bray
still screaming for a medic.
Viktor Hark fired his plasma pistol into the knots of foe around the doorway.
The combined squads of Rawne, Daur and Meryn were spread out and
dropping back through the dead park. There was nothing behind them except
shield-blocked hatches.
They’d given up valuable ground on Gaunt’s orders. There had been
nothing in return.
Hark fired again. They were going to be killed. One by one, with the
shield at their backs.
Sergeant Agun Soric, hero of Vervunhive, sat back against the wall. The
wound in his chest was sucking badly, and bloody foam was bubbling around
the seared entry hole. Slowly, he raised his lasgun in one hand, but the weight
of it was too much.
Men in red with metal grotesques were prowling forward towards him
through the smoke.
Sergeant Theiss knelt beside him, coming out of nowhere. He fired at the
enemy, forcing them into cover.
“Pull him up!” Soric heard Theiss yell.
Soric felt himself being lifted. Doyl and Mallor were under him, and
Lanasa had his feet.
Theiss, with Kazel, Venar and Mtane, laid down backing fire.
“Are we through?” gurgled Soric. “The shield…?”
“No,” said Doyl.
“Well…” said Soric, his eyes fading. “It’s been a good run, while it
lasted…”
“Soric!” Doyl yelled. “Soric!”
The first of the Blood Pact hit the vapour mill control chamber along the
upper passage.
Seena returned their fire until Ezlan and Nehn joined her. Her gunfire was
punctuated with curses about the .30 she should have been firing.
It was a narrow hall, and the three Ghost guns could hold it… unless the
enemy brought up something more punishing.
Three minutes after the upper hatch was assaulted, the lower main door
guarded by Mkeller came under fire. He saw a grenade slung his way in time
to slam the heavy iron hatch shut. The blast shook the door. Haller ran up and
helped Mkeller throw the lock bolts on the corners of the hatch.
“That won’t hold them long,” said Mkeller, and as if to prove it, the thump
of beating fists and gun-stocks began against the door.
Lwlyn, stationed in the other main floor doorway, suddenly fell back on
his backside with a curse. Blood soaked out across his battledress from his
left shoulder.
“I’m hit,” he said, then fainted.
Ferocious las-fire ripped in through his hatchway. Two bolts struck
Lwlyn’s unconscious form sprawled in the open and made sure he would
never wake up.
Guthrie reached the door and yanked it shut as las-fire hammered on the
outside.
“If we’re going to do something, we’d better do it now!” Guthrie yelled.
Bonin glanced at Domor. Domor shrugged. The chamber was a mess, with
spools of wires draped out of every corner.
“For what it’s worth, soldier,” said Jagdea, sitting down against the wall,
“I think you did your best.” She slid her short-bladed survival knife from her
boot-top and slit open the cuff of her pressure suit. Bonin saw her tumble two
white tablets out of the hollow cuff and tip them into her palm. She raised
them to her mouth.
Bonin leapt forward and slapped them aside.
“What the feth are you doing?”
“Get off me!”
“What the feth are you doing?”
“Taking the honourable route out, soldier. We’re dead. Worse than dead.
Fighter Command give us those tablets in case we have to ditch behind
enemy lines. The Blood Pact don’t take prisoners, you know.”
“You were going to kill yourself?”
“Skinwing venom, concentrated. It’s quite painless, so I’m told.”
Bonin slowly shook his head. Upon the gallery, Seena, Ezlan and Nehn
were blasting away.
“Suicide, Commander Jagdea? Isn’t that the coward’s way out?”
“Screw you, soldier. How much clearer do you need it? We’re dead. Deeee-
ay-dee. I’d rather die without pain than greet the death they’re bringing.”
Bonin dropped down in a crouch in front of her and scooped up the poison
pills. He rolled them in his palm.
“Colonel-Commissar Gaunt taught me that death was something to be
fought every last step of the way. Not welcomed. Not invited. Death comes
when it comes and only a fool would bring it early.”
“Are you calling me a fool, Bonin?”
“I’m only saying that all is not yet lost.”
“Really?”
“Really. It may only be a soldier’s ignorant philosophy, but in the Guard,
we keep fighting to the end. If we die, we die. But suicide is never an
option.”
Jagdea stared up at him.
“Give me the pills.”
“No.”
“I think I outrank you.”
“I hardly care.” Bonin dropped the tablets onto the floor and crushed them
with his heel. “Damn you, Bonin.”
“Yes, commander.”
“Do you really think something’s going to change here? That we might be
miraculously rescued?”
“Anything’s possible, as long as you allow for it. My mother told me I was
born under a lucky star. That luck’s never left me. There have been times I
should have died. At Vervunhive. I can show you the scars.”
“Spare me.” Her voice was thin and frail now.
“I believe in my luck, Jagdea. Tanith luck.”
“Screw you, we’re all dead. Listen to that.”
Bonin heard the furious hammering at the doors, the frantic resistance of
the trio on the gallery.
“Maybe. If we are, I promise you won’t suffer.”
“You’ll do me yourself? How gallant.”
Bonin ignored the sarcasm. “Tanith First-and-Only, ma’am. We look after
our own.”
On the gallery, Nehn flinched back, winged. Seena saw a Blood Pact trooper
charging them… only to fall. In all the worlds, it looked to her like he had
been hit in the back of the head by a hot-shot. The assault lapsed.
Her micro-bead chirped. “Who’s down there?” It was the Imperial Guard
channel. “Twenty-fourteen, come back?” she whispered. “Nine, twenty
fourteen. That you, Seena?”
“Sarge?”
“Large as life and twice as ugly, girl.”
“It’s Kolea! It’s Kolea!” Seena sang out to the chamber.
The combined squads of Obel, Kolea and Varl moved in through the upper
gallery and joined up with Haller and Domor’s units. It was all very calm,
matter of fact. There were a few handshakes and greetings. No whooping, no
cheering, nothing to betray the elation they all felt. Nothing to acknowledge
the dazzling fortune that had just turned their way.
By then, nearly psychotic levels of Blood Pact opposition were thrashing
in at the main ground floor hatchways. Varl sent the flamers to subdue it.
“Of course,” Kolea was saying.
“Really?” asked Haller, who’d been his second in the Vervunhive scratch
units.
“You don’t work mines and power plants all your life and not know how
the generator flow-systems work.”
Kolea walked over to what seemed like a side console and threw a
nondescript lever.
The lights dimmed. The gauges dropped. The thundering pant of the
turbines pitched away.
He turned from the console and saw the dumbstruck faces all around.
“What? What?”
The shields went down.
There was an electrical crackle and a sudden, violent rush of air as the shield
at the end of the stateroom vanished and pressure equalised.
“Now,” yelled Ibram Gaunt. “Now, now, now! Men of Tanith, Men of
Verghast! The tables turn!”
“Show me what the Imperial Guard can do!”
A REAPPRAISAL OF COMBAT POLICY
CIRENHOLM CITY OCCUPATION,
PHANTINE 214 to 222.771, M41
“Cirenholm was taken after seven hours of determined assault. A
handsome victory for the Imperial Guard. That’s what the textbooks will
say. However, the crucial gains that enabled the victory were achieved not
by mass assault, but by the stealthy application of highly trained, highly
disciplined individuals who were sensibly trusted with an unusual degree
of command autonomy, and who used their polished covert skills to disable
the enemy defences more completely than ten thousand slogging infantry
units could ever have managed. It’s just a shame we didn’t plan it that
way.”
—Antonid Biota, Chief Imperial Tactician, Phantine Theatre
ONE
Swollen plumes of brown fire-smoke drifted up from the south-facing edges
of Cirenholm’s trio of domes, and diluted into yellow smog in the hard
morning sunlight.
From the upper observation deck of the primary dome, it was difficult to
believe Phantine was a toxic world. The bright sun made the high altitude sky
powder-blue and, down below the sculptural curves of the domes, great
oceans of knotted white cloud spread out as far as the eye could see. Only
occasionally was there a dark stain or a ruddy surge of flame visible beneath
the clouds as the inferno of the Scald underlit them.
Like a pod of great sea mammals, the drogues were coming in. Eight of
them, each a kilometre long from nose-ram to tail fins, coasting along on the
morning wind, their taut silver and white skins gleaming. Pairs of tiny, fast
moving Lightnings crossed between them, making repeated low passes over
the city. Gunships, weapon-mounted variants of the drops that had brought
them to Cirenholm, slunk along beside the vast drogues in escort.
It was cold up on the observation deck. The city’s heating systems were
still off-line. It was taking a long time to get the vapour mill running back to
optimum after the sudden shutdown.
Gaunt pulled his long storm coat tight. Ice crystals were forming on the
glass of the observation port, and he wiped them off with a gloved hand.
There was something infinitely relaxing about watching the drogues
approach. He could just hear the distant chop of their massive prop banks.
Every now and then, the glass vibrated as a Lightning burned low
overhead.
“Ibram?”
Gaunt turned. Hark had entered the observation gallery, cradling two
beakers of steaming caffeine.
“Viktor, thank you,” Gaunt said, taking one.
“Quite a sight,” noted Hark, blowing the steam off his caffeine as he
sipped it.
“Indeed.”
A pilot tug had just fluttered out to anchor the nose of the lead drogue and
drag it into the hangar decks under the lip of the primary dome. Gaunt
watched the letters painted on the drogue’s nose — ZEPHYR — slowly
disappear one by one as it passed into the deep shadow under the lip.
Gaunt drank his hot caffeine gingerly. “What’s the latest?” He’d remained
on station with Beltayn for six hours, supervising the comm-traffic, before
catching a few, restless hours of sleep in an unaired room off the grand states
in secondary. Since he’d risen, he’d tried to stay away from the babbling
voxes. He needed calm.
“Some fighting still in the northern sectors. Rawne’s pretty much cleared
the last of secondary. Tertiary is clean, and Fazalur’s moving his forces up
into primary to bolster the Urdeshi. Heaviest resistance is up in the north
block of primary. Some bad stuff, but it’s just a matter of time. We found the
citizens, though. Kept in mass pens in the tertiary dome. Fazalur liberated
them. We’re beginning rehousing and repopulation.”
Gaunt nodded.
“What?” asked Hark.
“What what?”
Hark smiled. It was a rare expression for him. “That look in your eyes.
Sadness.”
“Oh, that. I was just pitying the Urdeshi. They had the worst of it, all told.
What’s the count now?”
“Twelve hundred dead, another nine hundred wounded.”
“And us?”
“Twenty-eight dead. Two hundred wounded.”
“How’s Corbec?”
Hark sighed. “It’s not looking good. I’m sorry, Ibram.”
“Why? You didn’t shoot him. What about Agun Soric?”
“They’ve crash resuscitated him twice already. He should have died on the
spot, the wound he took.”
“Agun’s a tough old feth. He’ll go when he wants to.”
“Let’s hope it’s not yet, then. I don’t know which we’d miss most.”
Gaunt frowned. “What do you mean?”
Hark shrugged. “Corbec’s the heart of the Tanith First. Everyone loves
him. We lose him, it’d be a body blow to all. But Soric is cut from the same
doth. He means a lot to the Verghastites. If he dies, I think it’ll knock the
stuffing out of the Verghast sections of the regiment. And we don’t want that.”
“They have other leaders: Daur, Kolea.”
“And they’re respected. But not like Soric. He’s their father figure, like the
Tanith have Corbec. Kolea could make more of himself, but I don’t think he
wants to be a totem. I honestly think Kolea would be happier as a basic
trooper.”
“I think so too, sometimes.” Gaunt watched the next drogue, the Boreas, as
it was tugged in under the hangar housing.
“Daur’s a good man too,” Hark continued. “I like him, but he’s… I don’t
know. Perky. Eager. The Verghastites don’t like that very much. He’s not
grounded like Soric. And the Tanith positively despise him.”
“Daur? They despise Daur?” Gaunt was shocked.
“Some of them,” said Hark, thinking of Rawne. “Most of the Tanith
genuinely appreciate the Verghast new blood, but none of them can really
shake the notion of intrusion. Intrusion into their regiment. Daur landed
authority equal to Major Rawne. To many, he exemplifies the invasion of the
First-and-Only by the Vervunhivers.”
“To Rawne, you mean?”
Hark grinned. “Yes, him especially. But not just him. It’s an honour thing.
Surely you’ve noticed it?”
Gaunt nodded without replying. He was well aware of the way Hark was
testing him. Hark was a loyal man, and had begun to perform his duties as
regimental commissar impeccably. But he was always testing boundaries. It
pleased Hark to think he was more in tune with the First’s spirit than Gaunt.
“I know we’ve got a good way to go before the Tanith and Verghastite
elements of this regiment reach comfortable equilibrium,” said Gaunt after a
long pause. “The Tanith men feel proprietorial about the regiment. Even the
most broad-minded of them see the Verghastites as outsiders. It’s their name
on the standard and the cap badge, after all. And it’s got nothing to do with
ability. I don’t think any Tanith would question the fighting spirit of the
Vervunhivers. It’s just a matter of… pride. This is and always was the Tanith
regiment. The new blood we brought from Verghast is not Tanith blood.”
“And, in reverse, the same goes for the Verghastites,” agreed Hark. “This
isn’t their regiment. They’ve got their own insignia, but they’ll never get their
name on the standard placard. They feel the resentment of the Tanith… they
feel it because it’s real. And they understand it, which makes things worse.
They want to make a mark for themselves. I’m actually surprised the divide
hasn’t been more… difficult.”
Gaunt sipped the last of his drink. “The Verghastites have made their mark.
They’ve helped our sniper strength grow enormously.”
“Yes, but who’s given them that edge? The women, for the most part. Don’t
mistake me, the girl snipers are a goddamned blessing to this combat force.
But male Verghast pride is dented because the women are the best they can
offer. They’ve made no scouts. And that’s where the true honour lies. That’s
what the First is famous for. The Tanith scouts are the elite, and have the
Verghasts produced even one trooper good enough to make that cut? No.”
“They’ve come close. Cuu.”
“That bastard.”
Gaunt chuckled. “Oh, I agree. Lijah Cuu is a fething menace. But he’s got
all the qualities of a first-rate scout.”
Hark set his beaker down on the windowsill and wiped his lips. “So…
have you given any thought as to how we can improve the regimental
divide?”
You’re testing again, Gaunt thought. “I’d welcome ideas,” he told Hark
diplomatically.
“A few promotions. I’d make Harjeon up to squad rank. And LaSalle.
Lillo too, maybe Cisky or Fonetta. We’ll need a few fresh sergeants now
Indrimmo and Tarnash are gone.”
“Cisky’s dead. More’s the pity. But I agree in principle. Not Harjeon. An
ex-pen pusher. The men don’t have any respect for him. Lillo’s a good
choice. So’s Fonetta. LaSalle, maybe. My money would be on Arcuda. He’s
a good man. Or Criid.”
“Okay. Arcuda. Makes sense. I don’t know about Criid. A female
sergeant? That might cause more problems than it solves. But I think we
should fast-track two or three into the scout corps.”
“Viktor, we can’t do that if there isn’t the talent. I’m not going to field
point men who haven’t got the chops for the job.”
“Of course. But Cuu, like you said. There are others. Muril.”
“Isn’t she wounded?”
“Getting a brand new steel hip, but she’ll make it. Also Jajjo, Livara and
Moullu.”
Gaunt frowned. “They’re possibles. Some of them. Muril’s got potential,
and Livara. But I’ve never known a man as clumsy as Moullu, for all that
he’s light on his feet. And Jajjo? I’d have to think about that. Besides, the
cut’s not down to me. It’s Mkoll’s call. Always has been.”
“You could order him t—”
“Viktor, enough. Don’t push it. The scout elite has always been Mkoll’s
area. I happily bow down to his expertise, I always have. If he thinks any of
that list can make the grade, he’ll take them. But if he doesn’t, I’m not going
to force them on him.”
“That’s fine. Mkoll knows his stuff.”
“He does. Look, I’ll keep my eyes open. I’ll do everything I can to balance
out the Verghastite/Tanith mix. Positive discrimination if necessary. But I
won’t risk damaging the combat core by advancing those who aren’t ready or
good enough.”
Hark seemed satisfied with this, but then he surprised Gaunt with a final
comment. “The Verghast need to know you value them as much as the Tanith,
Ibram. Really, they do. What will destroy them is the idea they’re latecomers
who can’t make the grade. They feel like second-class elements of this
regiment. That’s not good.”
Gaunt was about to reply, taken aback by the remark, but the deck’s inner
door slid open and a vox-officer dressed in the fur-trimmed uniform of the
Phantine Skyborne entered and saluted.
“Lord General Barthol Van Voytz is coming aboard, Colonel-Commissar
Gaunt. He requests your company.”
The drogue Nimbus was already edging in towards the vast hangar bay under
the primary dome, a little tug-launch revving its over-powered thrusters as it
heaved the vessel home. The drogue’s immense aluminium propeller spars
were making deep, whispering chops as they slowed to a halt.
Van Voytz had flown ahead. Escorted by two Lightnings that veered away
sharply once it had reached the hangar mouth, his checker-painted tri-motor
purred in under the shadow. It was a stocky transport plane with a bulbous
glass nose, and it made a heavy but clean landing on the deck way, its
powerful double-screwed props chattering into reverse as soon as its tail
hook caught the catch-line.
Gaunt stood waiting in the gloom of the hangar, a hangar which already
accommodated the massive bulk of the drogue Aeolus without seeming full.
The tri-motor’s engines were still roaring as the footwell slapped down
from the hull and Van Voytz emerged.
“Guard, attention!” Gaunt barked and the honour detail of Ghosts — Milo,
Guheen, Cocoer, Derin, Lillo and Garond, under the supervision of Sergeant
Theiss — smacked their heels together and shouldered arms smartly. Theiss
held the company standard.
The lord general bent low under the downwash of the props and hurried
forward up the ramp, flanked by his aide, Tactician Biota and four splendid
bodyguard troopers with blue-black tunics, hellguns and gold braid around
the brims of their shakos.
“Gaunt!”
“Lord general.”
Van Voytz shook his hand. “Damn fine job, soldier.”
“Thank you, sir. But it wasn’t me. I have a list of commendations.”
“They’ll all be approved, Gaunt. Mark my words. Damn fine job.” Van
Voytz gazed up around him as if he’d never seen a hangar deck before.
“Cirenholm.”
“Cirenholm, eh? One step forward.”
“One step back for the Urdeshi, with respect.”
“Ah, quite. I’ll be having words with Zhyte once he’s out of surgery. He
screwed up, didn’t he? Man’s a blow-hard menace. But you, Gaunt… you
and your Ghosts. You turned this fiasco on its head.”
“We did what we could, lord.”
“You did the Guard proud, colonel-commissar.”
“Thank you, sir.”
“You quite pulled a fast one, didn’t you?”
“Sir?”
“You and your covert experts. He quite pulled a fast one, didn’t he,
Biota?”
“He seems to have done, lord general,” Biota replied mildly.
“Making us do a rethink, Gaunt. A radical rethink. Ouranberg awaits,
Gaunt, and your work here has prompted us to make a hasty reappraisal of
combat policy. Hasn’t it, Biota?”
“It has, lord general.”
“It has indeed. What do you think of that, Gaunt?” Ibram Gaunt didn’t
know quite what to think.
Onti Flyte regarded herself as a true Imperial citizen, and had raised her
three children in that manner. When the archenemy had come to Cirenholm,
and overrun it so fast, she’d felt like the sky had fallen in. Her husband, a
worker in the mill, had been killed by the Part in the initial invasion. Onti,
her children and her neighbours, had been herded out of their habs by the
masked brutes and shut up in a pen in the bowels of tertiary.
It had been hellish. Precious little food or water, no sanitation. The place
had stunk like a drain by the end of the first day.
After that there had been disease and dirt, and the stench had become so
high she could no longer smell it.
Now, as the Imperial Guard escorted them back to their habs, she could
smell the stink. It was in her clothes and in her hair. She knew the streetblock
shower would have queues, and the laundry would be full to bursting,
but she wanted her kids clean and dressed in fresh clothes. That meant getting
the outhouse tub full, and hard work with the press.
A nice young Guardsman in black called Caffran had seen her and the kids
back to their hab. Onti had kept apologising for the way they smelled. The
boy, Caffran, had been so polite and kind.
It was only when she was back in her place, in the little parlour of her
terraced hab, that she’d cried. She realised how much she missed her
husband, and she was haunted by what the arch-enemy had undoubtedly done
to him.
Her children were running around. She wanted them to quiet down. She
was beside herself. The nice soldier — Caffran — looked in on her as the
streets outside swarmed with people returning to their homes under escort.
“Do you need anything?” he asked.
“Just a handsome husband,” Onti had joked, painfully, but trying hard.
“Sorry,” the nice soldier said. “I’m spoken for.”
Onti had put her head in her hands when he was gone and sobbed over the
parlour table.
Her eldest Beggi, had run in to tell her that the tub was almost full. He’d
put the soap crystals in, the special ones, and all the kids said they wanted
their mam to have the first bath.
She kissed them all in turn, and asked Erini to warm up a pot of beans for
them all.
Onti went out into the yard and saw the steam wallowing from the
outhouse where the tub sat. She could smell the peppermint vapours of the
soap crystals.
On the other side of the yard fence, her neighbour, an old pensioner called
Mr. Absolom, was sweeping out his back step.
“The mess they made, Ma’am Flyte,” he cried. “I know, Mr. Absolom!
Such a mess!” Onti Flyte went into the outhouse and dragged off her filthy
clothes.
Naked and wrapped in a threadbare towel, she was testing the water with
her hand when she heard the creak.
She looked up and froze, realising someone was crouching in the back of
the outhouse.
She felt vulnerable. She felt open. For a terrifying moment she thought it
was one of the archenemy, gone to ground. One of the foul, masked Blood
Part.
But it wasn’t.
The figure stepped out of the shadows.
It was a fine young Guardsman. Just like the lovely young man who had
escorted her and the kids back to her hab.
“Well, you shouldn’t be in here, sir,” she said. “You know what people say
about a fine soldier boy…”
She sniggered.
The soldier didn’t.
Onti Flyte suddenly realised that she was in trouble. Really bad trouble.
She opened her mouth, but nothing came out.
The soldier stepped forward. He was very distinctive looking.
He had a knife. A long, straight silver knife that shone against the black
fabric of his battledress.
She felt a scream building inside her. This wasn’t right. This wasn’t how it
worked.
“Don’t,” he said.
She screamed anyway. For a very short time.
Doc Dorden held the chipwood tongue depresser in the same confident way
Neskon held his flamer.
“Say ‘Aaargh’,” he said.
“Sgloot—” Milo managed.
“No, boy. ‘Aaargh’… ‘AAARGH’… like you’ve been stuck with an ork
bayonet.”
“Aaargh!”
“Better,” smiled Dorden, taking the stick out of Milo’s mouth and tossing it
into a waste sack taped to the side of his medikit. He grabbed Milo by the
head with both hands and examined his eyes, dragging the lids aside with
firm fingertips.
“Any nausea?”
“Only now.”
“Ha ha… any cramps? Blood in your spittle or stools? Headaches?”
“No.”
Dorden released his head. “You’ll live.”
“Is that a promise?”
Dorden smiled. “Not one in my power to give, I’m afraid. I wish—”
The old Tanith doctor added something else, but his words were lost in the
background hubbub of the billet hall. Milo didn’t ask him to repeat it. He was
sure from the doc’s sad eyes it had had something to do with his son, Mikal
Dorden, Ghost, dead on Verghast.
It was the third day after the raid. The Tanith First had been assigned
billets in a joined series of packing plants in the secondary dome. Hundreds
of wood bales had been laid down in rows for cots and the Munitorium
distribution crews had dropped a pair of thin blankets on each one. Most
Ghosts had supplemented this meagre bedding with their camo-cloaks,
bedrolls and musette bags stuffed with spare clothing.
The noise in the chamber was huge. In Milo’s alone there were nine
hundred men, and the wash of their voices and their activities filled the air
and echoed off the high roof. The men were relaxing, cleaning kit, field
stripping weapons, smoking, dicing, arm-wrestling, talking, comparing
trophies, comparing wounds, comparing deeds…
Dorden, Curth and the other medics were moving through the billets,
chamber by chamber, doing the routine post combat fitness checks.
“It’s amazing how many troopers hide injuries,” Dorden was saying as he
collected his kit together. “I’ve seen five flesh wounds already that men
didn’t think were worth bothering me with.”
“Honour scars,” said Milo. “Marks of valour. Lesp’s such a good
needleman, they’re afraid they’ll not have the marks to show and brag about.”
“More fool them, Brin,” said Dorden. “Nour had a las-burn that was going
septic.”
“Ah, there, you see?” replied Milo. “Verghast. They want the scars most of
all, to match our Tanith tattoos.”
Dorden made a sour face, the sort of sour face he always made when
confronted by naive soldier ways. He handed Milo two pill capsules of
different colours and a paper twist of powder.
“Take these. Basic vitamins and minerals, plus a hefty antibiotic boost.
New air, new germ pool. And sealed and recirculated, which is worse. We
don’t want you all coming down with some native flu that your systems have
no defence against. And we don’t know what the scum brought here with
them either.”
“The powder?”
“Dust your clothes and your boots. The Blood Pact had lice and now
they’re gone, the lice are looking for new lodgings. The poor Phantine found
their billets in tertiary were infested.”
Milo swigged the pills down with a gulp from his canteen and then set
about obediently sprinkling his kit with the powder. He’d been halfway
through stripping his lasrifle when the doc reached his cot in the line, and he
wanted to get back to it. Troops were being pulled out every few hours to
assist in Major Rawne’s final sweep of the primary dome. Milo was sure he
would be called soon.
Dorden nodded to Milo and moved on to Ezlan at the next cot.
Milo looked across the busy activity of the cot rows. Two lines away,
Surgeon Curth was checking a trooper’s scalp wound. Milo sighed. He liked
Doc Dorden a lot but he wished Curth had reached his row first. He would
have enjoyed being examined by her.
He pushed his half-stripped las to one side and lay back on his cot with his
hands behind his head, staring at the roof and trying to blot out the noise. Try
as he might over these last few months, he had been unable to stop thinking
about Esholi Sanian, the young scholar who had guided them to the
Shrinehold on Hagia, their last battlefield. He’d liked her a lot. And he had
been sure the feeling was mutual. The fact that he would never, ever see her
again didn’t seem to matter to Milo. She wouldn’t leave his mind and she
certainly wouldn’t leave his dreams.
He’d never spoken about it to anyone. Most of the Tanith had lost wives or
sweethearts on the home world, and most of the Verghastites had left their
loves and lives behind. There were females in the regiment now, of course,
and every last one of them was the object of at least one trooper’s affection.
There were some romances too. His friend Caffran’s was the best. His first
love Laria had perished with Tanith, and he’d been as forlorn as the rest for a
long time. Then on Verghast, right in the thick of the hive-war, he’d met Tona
Criid. Tona Criid… ganger, hab girl, scratch fighter, mother of two young
kids. Neither Caffran nor Criid, both of whom Milo now counted amongst his
closest friends, had ever described it as love at first sight. But Milo had seen
the way they looked at each other.
When the Act of Consolation had been announced, Criid had joined the
Ghosts as standard infantry. Her kids came along, cared for during times of
action by the Ghosts’ straggling entourage of cooks, armourers,
quartermasters, barbers, cobblers, musicians, traders, camp followers and
other children. Every Guard regiment had its baggage train of noncombatants,
and the Ghosts’ now numbered over three hundred. Regiments
accreted non-combatant hangers-on like an equine collected flies.
Now Caff and Criid were together. It was the Ghosts’ one, sweet love
story. The troops might smile at the couple, but they respected the union. No
one had ever dared get in between them.
Milo sighed to himself sadly. He wished that Sanian had been able to
come along with him that way.
He thought for a moment about going down to the hangar deck where the
entourage was encamped. He could get a meal from the cook-stoves, and
maybe visit one of the overly-painted women who followed the regiment and
saw to the men’s needs.
He rejected the idea. He’d never done that and it didn’t really appeal
except at the most basic level.
Anyway, they weren’t Sanian. And it wasn’t sex he was after. Sanian was
inside his head, like it mattered she should be there. He didn’t want to do
anything that might eclipse her memory.
And he couldn’t for the life of him explain why the memory of her refused
to fade. Except… the prophecy. The one the old ayatani priests of Hagia had
made. That Milo would find some way, some purpose, in years to come.
Milo hoped that had something to do with Sanian. He hoped that was why
she remained bright in his mind. Maybe, somehow, she was his way.
Probably not. But it made him feel better to think of it like that.
“Now that looks like trouble,” he heard Doc Dorden say from the next cot
along.
Milo sat up and looked. Far away, at the entrance to the billet hall, he
could see Captain Daur talking seriously with a pair of Imperial commissars
Milo had never seen before. The commissars were flanked by eight armed
Phantine troopers.
“On whose authority?” Daur snapped.
“Imperial Taskforce Commissariate, captain, Commissar Del Mar. This is
an internal security matter.”
“Does Colonel-Commissar Gaunt know about this?”
The two commissars looked at each other.
“He doesn’t does he?” smiled Daur. “What about Commissar Hark?”
“You are delaying us, captain,” said the shorter of the two commissars.
His name, he had told Daur, was Fultingo, and he was attached to Admiral
Ornoff’s staff. The other one, taller and gawkier, and wearing the pins of a
cadet-commissar, had fresh Urdeshi insignia sewn onto his coat.
“Yes, I am. I want to know what this is about,” said Daur. “You can’t just
march in here and start questioning my troops.”
“Actually, sir, we can,” said Fultingo.
“This is Gaunt’s regiment, these are Gaunt’s men…” Daur said quietly.
“Ibram Gaunt the only commissar I know of to hold a command rank. Don’t
you think simple courtesy would have you approve it via him?”
“The God-Emperor’s exalted Commissariate has little time for courtesy,
captain.” Daur turned and saw Hark strolling up behind him. “Unfortunately.
However, as assigned Tanith First commissar, I intend to make sure that
courtesy is extended.”
“They want to search the billet,” Daur said. “Do they? Why?” Hark asked.
“A matter of internal security,” said Fultingo’s cadet quickly. Hark raised
his eyebrows. “Really… why?”
“Commissar Hark, are you refusing to cooperate?” asked Fultingo.
Hark turned. He took off his cap and tucked it under his arm. He fixed
Fultingo with a poisonous stare. “You know me?”
“We were briefed.”
“Yet I don’t know you, or your… junior.” Hark waved his cap at the cadet.
“I am Commissar Fultingo, from the admiral’s general staff. This is Cadet
Goosen, who was serving under the Urdeshi Commissar Frant.”
“And Frant couldn’t be bothered to attend?”
“Commissar Frant was killed in the assault,” said Goosen nervously,
adjusting his collar.
“Oh, thrust into the limelight, eh, cadet?” smiled Hark.
“Not in any way I would have wished,” said Goosen. Daur thought that
was a particularly brave response from the junior officer. Hark was in the
process of bringing his full, withering persona to bear.
“So… Fultingo… what’s this all about?” asked Hark softly.
“Something to do with that child, I should think,” said Curth. She’d joined
them from the billet rows, her brow knotted. She pushed past the officers and
the escort and knelt beside a small, grubby boy who was holding onto the last
trooper’s coat tails and trying not to cry.
“My name’s Ana. What’s your name?” she whispered.
“Beggi…” he said.
“Did you know that?” she asked Fultingo caustically.
Fultingo consulted his data-slate. “Yes. Beggi Flyte. Eldest son of Onti
Flyte, Cirenholm mill-wife.”
The boy was shuddering with tears now.
“He’s deeply traumatised!” Curth spat, holding the child. “Why did you
see fit to drag him around these billets and—”
“He’s deeply traumatised, ma’am,” said Fultingo, “because his mother is
dead. Murdered. By one of the Ghosts. Now… can we proceed?”
The entourage camp was a heady, smoky place half filling a cargo hangar.
Cooks were roasting poultry and boiling up stews along a row of chemical
stoves, and their assistants were dicing vegetables and herbs on chopping
stands nearby. There was music playing, pipes, mandolins and hand-drums,
and behind that there was the steady chink-chink of the armourers in their
work-tents. Ghosts milled about, eating, drinking, getting their weapons
sharpened, dancing and laughing, chatting conspiratorially to the painted
women.
Kolea moved through the press. A fire-eater retched flame into the air and
people clapped. The sounds reminded Gol of flamers in battle.
Someone offered him a smoked chicken portion for a credit but he waved
them aside. Another, dressed in gaudy robes and sporting augmetic fingers,
tried to interest him in a round of “find the lady”. “No thanks,” said Gol
Kolea, pushing past. A bladesmith was sharpening knives on a pedal-turned
whetstone. Sparks flew up. Kolea saw Trooper Unkin waiting in line behind
Trooper Cuu for his straight silver to be edged. Cuu’s blade had already been
rubbed in oil and was now set at the grinder, sparking. He moved on. Black
marketeers offered him size three clips.
“Where the gak were you?” he snarled, sending them away with a cuff.
Others had candy, porn-slates, exotic weapons, booze.
“Real sacra! Real, ghosty-man! Try it!”
“Can’t stand the stuff,” growled Kolea, shouldering through.
A one-legged hawker showed off talismans of the Emperor, Tanith badges
and aquila crests. Another, his face sewn together, produced chronometers,
nightscopes and contraband micro-beads.
Yet another, limbless and moving thanks to a spider-armed augmetic
chassis, displayed lho-sticks, cigars and several stronger narcotics.
A juggler tumbled past. A mime artist, her face yellow and stark,
performed the death of Solan to an appreciative crowd. A small boy ran
through the crowd, running a hoop with a stick. Two little girls, neither of
them more than five years old, were playing hop-square.
“Going my way, handsome?”
Kolea stopped in his tracks. His Livy had always called him “handsome”.
He looked round. It wasn’t Livy.
The camp-girl was actually pretty, though far too heavily made-up. Her
dark-lashed eyes were bright and vivid. A beauty spot sat on her powdered
cheek. She smiled at Kolea, her long skirt bunched up either side of her hips
in her lace-gloved hands as she posed coquettishly. Her large, round breasts
might as well have been bared given the flimsiness of the satin band that
restrained them.
“Going my way?”
Her perfume was intoxicatingly strong.
“No,” said Kolea. “Sorry.”
“Ballless gak,” she hissed after him.
He tried to ignore her. He tried to ignore everything.
Aleksa was waiting for him in her silk tent.
“Gol,” she smiled. She was a big woman, fast approaching the end of her
working days. No amount of powder, paint or perfume could really sweeten
her rotund bulk. Her petticoats were old and threadbare, and her lace and
holiathi gown was faded. She cradled a cut-crystal glass of amasec against
her colossally exposed bosom with a wrinkled, ringed hand.
“Aleksa,” he said, closing the hems of her tent behind him.
She wriggled around on her pile of silk cushions. “The usual?” she asked.
Gol Kolea nodded. He took the coins from his safe-belt, counted them
again and offered them to her.
“On the nightstand, please. I don’t like to get my gloves dirty.”
Kolea heaped the coins on the side table.
“Okay then… off you go,” she said.
He climbed on to the heap of cushions, and crawled across past Aleksa.
She lay back, watching him.
Kolea reached the wall of the tent and parted the silk around the slit
Aleksa had made for him.
“Where are they?”
“Right there, Gol.”
He angled his head. Outside, across the walkway, two children were
playing a nameless game in a gutter puddle. A small boy and a toddler,
laughing together.
“They’ve been okay?”
“They’ve been fine, Gol,” said Aleksa. “You pay me to look after them so
I do. Yoncy had a cough last week, but it’s cleared up.”
“Dalin… he’s getting so big.”
“He’s a feisty one, no doubt. Takes a lot of watching.” Kolea smiled.
“Which is all I do.”
He sat back on the cushions. She leaned forward and rubbed his shoulders
with her hands.
“We’ve been through this, Gol. You should say something. You really
should. It’s not right.”
“Caff and Tona… they’re doing right by them?”
“Yes, yes! Believe me, they’re… I was going to say they were the best
parents those kids could get… but you know what I mean.”
“Yeah.”
“Oh, Gol, come on.”
He looked round at her. “They’re mine, Aleksa.”
She grinned. “Yes, they are. So go out there and claim them.”
“No. Not now. I won’t gak up their lives anymore. Their daddy’s dead. It
has to stay that way”
“Gol… it’s not my place to say this—”
“Say it.”
Aleksa grinned encouragingly. “Just do it. Criid will understand. Caffran
too.”
“No!”
“Criid’s a good woman. I’ve got to know her, the time she spends here.
She’d understand. She’d be… oh, I don’t know. Grateful?”
Kolea took one last look through the slit. Dalin had made a paper boat for
Yoncy and they were sailing it down the murky gutter.
“Too late,” breathed Kolea. “For their sakes, and for mine, too late.”
The party reached the end of the last Ghost billet hall. Off-duty troopers
watched them curiously as they passed by the cots. The boy had done little
except stare and occasionally shake his head.
“Nothing?” asked Hark.
“No one he recognises,” said Fultingo.
“Satisfied, then?” snapped Curth.
“Not at all.” Fultingo dropped his voice. “That boy’s mother was killed in
a frenzied knife attack. The wounds match exactly the pattern and dimensions
of a Tanith warknife.”
“Knives can be stolen. Or lost in battle. Or taken from the dead. Some of
the Ghosts may be missing their blades…” Hark said confidently. Daur knew
it was for show. A warknife was a Ghost’s most treasured possession. They
didn’t lose them. And they made sure their dead always went to the grave
with their straight silver.
Fultingo wasn’t put off anyway. “Several witnesses saw a man in Tanith
First battledress leaving the area of the habs. A man in a hurry.”
“Large? Small? Bearded? Clean-shaven? Tanith colouring or Verghast?
Distinguishing marks? Rank pins?” Hark demanded.
“Lean, compact. Clean-shaven,” Goosen read from his notes. “No one got
a clear look. Except the boy. He’s the best witness.”
Hark looked round at Daur and Curth. “I deplore this crime, commissar,”
he said to Fultingo. “But this witch hunt’s gone far enough. The boy’s been
through the halls and he hasn’t recognised anyone. There’s been a mistake.
Your killer isn’t a Ghost.”
Hark led them out into the corridor away from the men. It was cold, and
condensation dribbled from the heating pipes that ran along the wall.
“I suggest you check with other regiments and explore other avenues of
enquiry.”
Fultingo was about to reply, but they had to move aside as a platoon of
weary Ghosts thumped down the corridor, dirty and smelling of smoke. A
clearance squad returning from the fighting in the primary dome. Some were
wounded or at least blood-stained.
“We haven’t seen all of the men,” said Fultingo as they clomped past.
“There’s still a number in the active zone and—”
“What is it? Beggi?” Curth said suddenly, crouching by the boy. He was
pointing. “What did you see?”
The boy didn’t speak, but his finger’s aim was an inexorable as a long-las.
“Detachment halt!” Hark shouted, and the returning platoon came up sharp,
turning in fatigued confusion.
“Is there a problem, commissar, sir?” asked Corporal Meryn, moving back
from the head of the line.
“Is that him, Beggi?” asked Curth, warily.
“Is that the man?” echoed Hark. “Son, is it?”
Beggi Flyte nodded slowly.
“Trooper! Come over here,” Hark growled.
“Me?” asked Caffran. “Why?”
TWO
The great bells of the Phantine Basilica pealed out into the morning across a
municipal square at the heart of primary dome, and the sound of them raised
cheering from the great gathering of Cirenholmers. The bells had been cast
seventeen centuries before to serve the original Basilica some five
kilometres below at a time when Phantine culture had occupied the surface of
the planet. Since then, the cities had been serially abandoned and rebuilt on
higher and ever higher ground to escape the rising blanket of pollution, and
each time, the bells had been removed and transported up to the newly
consecrated church.
Now they rang for joy. And they rang to signal the end of the service of
deliverance that had been held to formally mark the liberation of Cirenholm.
The night before, the last of the Blood Pact dug into the northern edges of the
primary dome had been slaughtered or captured. Cirenholm was free.
Ecclesiarchs from Hessenville had conducted the service as all the
Imperial priests in Cirenholm had been butchered during the invasion. The
worthies of the city attended, some still sick and weak from their suffering
during the occupation. So many citizens had come, the majority had been
forced to congregate outside in the square and listen to the service via brass
tannoys.
Hundreds of Imperial officers from the liberation force had also attended
as a gesture of respect. Van Voytz, dignified in his dress uniform, had risen to
say a few words. Diplomatically, his speech mentioned the efforts of the
Tanith, Phantine and Urdeshi without differentiation. This was not a time for
rebukes.
When the service was over and the bells were ringing. Gaunt rose from his
pew and followed the crowds outside into the square. He paused briefly to
speak to Major Fazalur, the stoic Phantine troop leader, and to a young
officer called Shenko who was now, apparently, acting commander of the
Urdeshi.
“How’s Zhyte?” Gaunt asked.
“His fighting days are over, sir,” Shenko replied, with obvious
awkwardness. “He’s to be shipped off-world to a veterans’ hospice on Fortis
Binary.”
“I hope his time there is happier than mine was,” said Gaunt with a
reflective smile.
“Sir, I—” Shenko fumbled for the words.
“I don’t bite, despite what you may have heard.”
Shenko grinned nervously. “I just wanted to say… Zhyte was a good
commander. A damn good commander. He saw us through hell several times.
He always had a temper and his pride, well… I know he made a mistake
here, sir. But I just wanted to say—”
“Enough, Shenko. I have no animosity towards the Urdeshi. I’ve actually
admired their fortitude since Balhaut—”
“You saw action on Balhaut?” asked Shenko, his eyes wide.
“I did. I was with the Hyrkans then.” Gaunt smiled. Was he so old his past
actions had a ring of history in the ears of younger men?
“Ask one of your veterans to tell you about Hill 67 sometime. The Hyrkans
to the west of the ridge, the Urdeshi to the east. I don’t bear a grudge, and I’m
certainly not going to damn a whole regiment because of the attitude and
actions of one man. Zhyte should have… ah, never mind. Your boys paid for
his mistake here. Feth, Zhyte paid too, come to think of it. Just do me a
favour.”
“Sir?”
“Be what he wasn’t. We’re going into the next theatre together soon. I’d
like to think the Urdeshi will be allies, not rivals.”
“You have my hand on it colonel-commissar.”
Gaunt walked away down the steps, through the throngs of people, stiff in
his braided dress uniform.
Confetti streamed in the wind, and citizens pushed forward to hang paper
garlands around the necks of their liberators and kiss their hands. Real
flowers had vanished from Phantine eight centuries before, except for a few
precious blooms raised in specialist hortivatae. But the paper mills still
functioned.
With a garland of paper lilies around his neck. Gaunt made his way slowly
through the crush on the square, shaking the hands thrust at him. He caught
sight of a particularly striking officer dutifully shaking hands. It was Rawne.
Gaunt smiled. He so seldom saw Rawne in full ceremonial regalia, it was a
shock.
He moved over to him.
“Nice pansies,” he whispered mockingly in Rawne’s ear as he shook the
eager hands.
“Speak for yourself,” returned Rawne, glancing from his own garland to
Gaunt’s. The suturing around his blood-shot eye made his glare even angrier
than usual.
“Let’s get out of here,” said Gaunt still smiling outwardly at the crowd.
“Good idea! Where to?” said Ayatani Zweil, appearing out of the press of
reaching hands. Zweil had a half dozen garlands round his neck.
They pushed to the edge of the crowd and, with hands aching, made off down
a side street. Even then they were stopped several times to be kissed, hugged
or thanked.
“If this is the upside of a soldier’s life, no wonder you like it,” said Zweil.
“I haven’t been worshipped this much since I was a missionary on Lurkan,
walking the bead’s path. Of course, at that time, I was much better looking,
and it helped that the locals were expecting the return of a messiah named
Zweil.”
Gaunt chuckled, but Rawne wasn’t amused. He tore off his garland and
tossed it into the gutter.
“The mawkish praise of sweaty hab-folk isn’t why I signed up,” he
sneered. “That rabble probably thanked the Blood Pact just as effusively
when they arrived. It always pays to be nice to the armed men controlling the
place you live in.”
“You truly are the most cynical devil I’ve ever met, major,” Zweil
remarked.
“Life sucks, holy father. Wake up and smell the flowers.”
Zweil toyed wistfully with the paper blooms around his neck. “If only I
could.”
“If you didn’t sign up to enjoy the adulation of the Imperial common folk,
Rawne,” Gaunt said, “what did you do it for?”
Rawne thought for a moment. “Feth you,” was all he could come up with.
Gaunt nodded. “My thoughts exactly.” He stopped. “This will do,” he told
them.
It was a tavern. Built into the basement of a shabby records bureau, there was
a steep set of steps running down from street level to the door. It had been
closed since the Blood Pact occupation, and Gaunt had to pay the nervous
owner well to get them in.
The place was dismal and littered with smashed glasses and broken
furniture. The heathens had caroused their nights away, breaking everything
they were finished with. Two girls, the owner’s teenage daughters, were
sweeping up debris. They’d already filled several sacks. The owner’s
brother was furiously scrubbing the walls with a bristle-brush dipped in
caustic soda, trying to obliterate the obscenities that had been daubed on the
plastered walls.
Gaunt, Rawne and Zweil took seats on a high bench beside the bar.
“I shouldn’t be open,” the owner said. “But for the saviours of Cirenholm,
I’ll gladly make an exception.”
“A double exception, I hope,” said Zweil. “What will you have?”
“You have any sacra?” Gaunt asked. “Uhh… no, sir. Not sure what that is.”
“No matter. Amasec?”
“I used to,” the owner said ruefully. “Let me see if there’s any left.”
“What are we doing here?” Rawne growled. “Our duty,” Gaunt told him.
The bar owner returned with a pathetically dented tray on which sat three
shot glasses of different sizes and a bottle of amasec.
He set the glasses down in front of the trio. “My apologies. These are the
only glasses I could find that haven’t been broken.”
“In that case,” Gaunt assured him, “they will be perfect.” The owner
nodded, and filled each glass up with the strong liquor.
“Leave the bottle,” Zweil advised him.
Rawne turned his glass slowly, eyeing the serious measure of alcohol.
“What are we drinking to?” he asked.
“The glorious liberation of Cirenholm in the name of the God-Emperor!”
Zweil declared, smacking his lips and raising his shot.
Gaunt arrested his rising arm with a hand. “No, we’re not. Well, not really.
At battle’s end, Colm Corbec would have sniffed out the nearest bar and
done just that. Today, he can’t. So we’re going to do it for him.”
Gaunt took up his glass and studied it dubiously, like it was venom.
“Colm Corbec. First-and-Only. Would that he was here now.”
He knocked back the shot in a single gulp. “Colm Corbec,” Rawne and
Zweil echoed and sank their shots.
“How is he?” Rawne asked. “I’ve been at the front until now… not had a
chance to… you know…”
“I went by the infirmary on my way here,” Gaunt said, playing with his
empty glass. “No change. He’s probably going to die. The medics are amazed
he’s lasted this long.”
“Won’t be the same without him…” Rawne muttered.
Gaunt looked round at him. “Did I just hear that from Major fething
Rawne?”
Rawne scowled. “There’s no shame in admitting we’ll be poorer without
Corbec. Now, if it was you that was at death’s door, I’d be buying drinks for
the whole fething regiment.”
Gaunt laughed.
“Speaking of which,” Zweil said, refilling their glasses.
Gaunt held his glass but didn’t drink. “I made a point of seeing Raglon
earlier. Gave him brevet command of second platoon. He’s got the chops for
it, and as Corbec’s adjutant, he’s the obvious choice.”
Rawne nodded.
“And, on the record for a moment, I hereby give you second command,
major. Until further notice.”
“Not Daur?” asked Zweil.
“Feth Daur!” Rawne spat, knocking back his drink. “No, ayatani. Not
Daur,” said Gaunt. “Any reason it should be?”
Zweil sipped his drink and shrugged. “The divide, I suppose.”
“The what?” asked Rawne, refreshing his own glass.
“The divide between the Tanith and the Verghastites,” Zweil explained.
“The Vervunhive mob feel like they’re always in second place. In terms of
morale, raising Daur to second would have pleased them.”
Rawne snorted. “Fething Verghasts.”
Gaunt looked round at Zweil. The priest’s remarks had reminded him
forcefully of Hark’s comments on the observation deck a few days before.
Had Hark and Zweil been talking? “Look, ayatani-father… I admire you and
trust you, I use your advice and seek your council… spiritually. But when it
comes to regiment protocol, I trust myself. Thank you for your opinion
though.”
“Hey, I was just saying—” said Zweil.
“The Tanith First is the Tanith First,” said Gaunt. “I want to make sure
there’s a balance, but when it comes to second officer, it has to be a Tanith in
the role. Elevating Daur would give the wrong message to the men.”
“Well, you know what you’re doing, Ibram. Be careful of that balance,
though. Don’t lose the Verghasts. They already feel they’re second-class
Ghosts.”
“They are,” said Rawne.
“Enough, Rawne. I expect you to use the Verghastites as well as you use
the Tanith.”
“Whatever.”
“How’s Soric?” Zweil asked.
Gaunt raised his drink. “Dying, like Corbec. Faster, perhaps.”
“Here’s to the soul of the Verghasts, then,” said Zweil. “Agun Soric.”
They toasted and drained their shots.
Rawne made to top up their glasses from the bottle. “And a toast to the
next action, God-Emperor save us. Ouranberg. May it be half of Cirenholm.”
“It won’t be,” said Gaunt. He covered his empty glass to stop Rawne
filling it. One for Colm, one for Soric. That would do. “It will be hell. The
lord general’s struck with some idea involving the Ghosts that he won’t
explain. I have a bad feeling about it. And it’s been confirmed that Sagittar
Slaith is in personal command of Ouranberg.”
“Slaith himself?” muttered Rawne. “Feth.”
“There is some good news,” Gaunt said. “A drogue arrived from
Hessenville this morning with twenty thousand size three clips in its hold.”
“Praise be!” said Rawne humourlessly.
“Praise be indeed,” Gaunt said. “The invasion drop is imminent and I’m
just glad the Ghosts will be going in well supplied.”
“I just hope the business with Caffran is done by then,” said Rawne.
“What business?” Gaunt asked.
“Oh, the murder thing?” said Zweil. “That was just ghastly.”
“What ‘business’? What ‘murder thing’?” Gaunt growled.
“Oh dear,” teased Rawne. “Did I say too much? Has Hark been keeping it
from you?”
“Keeping what?”
“The First-and-Only’s dirty laundry,” said Rawne. “I’m surprised at
Caffran, actually. Didn’t think he had it in him. Son of a bitch has plentiful
grazing in that Criid woman without looking elsewhere. And murder? He has
to be really fethed up to do that sort of shit. Heyyy!”
Gaunt had pushed Rawne off the end of the bench to get past him.
“Gaunt? Gaunt?” Zweil cried. But the colonel-commissar was running up
the steps into the street and gone.
Viktor Hark backed across the room, bumped into a filing cabinet and
realised there was nowhere left to retreat to.
“Wben were you intending to tell me, Viktor?” asked Gaunt.
Hark rose slowly. “You were busy. With the lord general. And politically,
I thought you could do with being distanced from it.”
“I brought you into this unit to serve as a political officer I could trust.
Play all the spin you like, Viktor. But don’t you ever dare keep me out of the
loop again.”
Hark straightened his jacket and looked at Gaunt. “You don’t want this,
Ibram,” he said softly.
“Feth that! I am the Ghosts! All the Ghosts! If it affects any one of them, it
affects me.”
Hark shook his head. “How did you ever get this far being so naive?”
“How did I ever think to trust you that you don’t know that?” said Gaunt.
Hark shook his head sadly. He reached to the desk and handed Gaunt a
data-slate. “A hab-wife called Onti Flyte was butchered three nights ago.
Stabbed with a Tanith knife. Witnesses saw a Ghost running from the
premises. The victim’s son positively identified Caffran. Case closed. I
didn’t bother you with it because it was just a minor incident. That’s what
I’m here for, sir. Taking care of the crap while you focus on the bigger
picture.”
“Is that so? What will happen to Caffran?”
“Commissar Del Mar has ordered his execution by las-squad at dawn
tomorrow.”
“And it didn’t occur to you that I’d question the loss of a trooper as
valuable as Caffran?”
“Given his crime, no sir.”
“And what does Caff say?”
“He denies it, of course.”
“Of course… he’ll deny it particularly if he was innocent. I take it at least
a routine investigation is being carried out? Witnesses can sometimes be
mistaken.”
“Del Mar’s staff is running the case. A Commissar Fultingo is lea—”
“You’ve just washed your hands of it?” Hark fell silent.
“Local, civil law enforcement and the task force Commissariate have
jurisdiction, of course. But this is also squarely a regimental matter. A matter
for us. If there’s a chance Caffran is innocent, I’m not going to let it go. Leave
me the slate and get out of here,” Gaunt said.
Hark tossed the data-slate onto the table and walked out. “Sir?” he asked,
pausing in the doorway. “I know Caffran’s been with you from the start. I
know he’s well-liked and that he’s a good soldier. But this is open and shut.
The Tanith First are a remarkably well-behaved group of soldiers, you know.
Sure, we get to deal with brawling and drinking, a few feuds and thefts, but
nothing compared to some units I’ve served with. Summary execution for
capital offences is almost routine in other regiments. Murder, manslaughter,
rape. The Guard is full of killers and many of them can’t help themselves.
Dammit, you know that! Strict, rapid discipline is the only way to maintain
control. I repeat, this is just a minor incident. It is nothing compared with the
vital nature of the holy war we’re undertaking. You shouldn’t be wasting your
time on this.”
“I’m wasting my time, Hark, precisely because it is so uncommon in this
regiment. Now get the feth out of my sight for a while.”
Varl found his way to the infirmary by following the scent of disinfectant It
was confusing at first because almost every hallway and access in the
secondary dome smelled of the stuff. There were Munitorium and civil work
gangs all over the city hosing down floors and scrubbing away the reek and
filth of the enemy.
But the infirmary had a stink of its own. Disinfectant. Blood.
The taskforce medicae had occupied an apprentices’ college on one of the
mid-level floors, close by the dome skin. The walls and roofs of some of the
larger rooms demonstrated the gentle curve of the city’s shape. Flakboard
and shielding raised by the enemy had been stripped away from the windows
to let in the cool light. Outside, through thick, discoloured armourglas, the
pearly cloudscape spread away as far as the eye could see.
The place was busy. Varl edged his way in between weary nurses and
arguing orderlies, bustling corpsmen resupplying their field kits from a
dispensary, cleaning crews, walking wounded. Every chamber he passed
was full of casualties, mainly Urdeshi, supported in crude but functional
conditions. The worst cases were screened off in side wards.
The smell of pain was inescapable, and so was the low, background
murmur of groans.
Varl slid his back to a wall to allow two medicae orderlies hurrying along
with a resuscitrex cart to pass, and then entered the gloom of an intensive
ward. The lighting was low-level, and trained around the individual beds.
There was a steady, arrhythmic bleep of vitalators and the asthmatic wheeze
and thump of the automatic respirator bellows.
Corbec lay on a rumpled cot, half-tangled in khaki sheets, like a shroudwrapped
pieta in an Imperial hero shrine. His limbs were sprawled, knotted
in the fabric, as if he had turned restlessly in his dreams. Drips and monitor
cables were variously anchored into his massive arms and chest, and his
mouth and nose were plugged with larger, thicker tubes. It looked as if they
were choking him. Corbec’s eyes were sealed with surgical tape. Through
his thick, black body hair it was possible to see the yellowing bruises and the
hundreds of little, scabby cuts that marked his skin.
Varl stood looking at him for a long time and realised he couldn’t think of
anything to say or do. He wasn’t even sure why he’d come.
He was halfway down the corridor on his way out when Dorden called out
to him.
“Looking in on the chief, Varl?” the old doctor asked, coming over, his
attention half on a data-slate he was reviewing.
Varl shrugged. “Yeah, I—”
“You’re not the first. Been Tanith in here all morning. In ones or twos. A
few Verghastites too. Paying their respects.”
Varl breathed out deeply and stuck his hands in his pockets of his black
combat pants. “I don’t know about respects,” he said. “I don’t mean that
nasty, doc. I mean I… I think I just came to see.”
“To see Colm?”
“To see if it was true. Corbec’s dying, they say. But I couldn’t picture it
Couldn’t see it in my head to believe it.”
“And now?” asked Dorden, handing the slate to a passing nurse.
“Still can’t.” Varl grinned. “He’s not going to die, is he?”
“Well, we should all keep hoping and praying—”
“No, doc. I wasn’t looking for no reassurance. If he’s going to die, I hope
you’d tell me. I just don’t feel it. Standing there, I just don’t. It doesn’t feel
like his time. Like he’s not ready and he’s fething well not going to let go.”
It was Dorden’s turn to smile. “You saw that too, huh? I haven’t said that to
anyone because I didn’t want to get hopes up unfairly. But I feel it that way as
well.”
“Doesn’t seem hardly fair, does it?” said Varl. “Corbec takes some
punishment He almost missed the show on Hagia and I know those injuries
have only just healed. Now this.”
“Colm Corbec is a brave man and he takes risks. Too many risks, in my
opinion. Mainly because, like all good officers, he leads by example. You
know he got messed up this way saving Muril’s life?”
“I heard.”
“Take risks, Varl, and sooner or later you get hurt. In Corbec’s case sooner
and later.”
Varl nodded, threw a half-salute, and turned to go. Then he hesitated.
“Doc?”
“Yes, sergeant?”
“About taking risks. I, uh… look, if I tell you something, it’s just between
us, right?”
“I can offer standard medicae confidentiality, Varl, providing it doesn’t
conflict with Guard security issues. And… I’m your friend.”
“Right, good.” Varl drew Dorden to one side, off the main corridor, into
the entrance to one of the critical wards. He dropped his voice.
“Kolea.”
“Shoot.”
“He’s a fine soldier. One of the best”
“Agreed.”
“Good leader too.”
“No arguments.”
“We’d never have pushed the assault as far as we did if it hadn’t been for
him. He really… he did a real Corbec, if you know what I mean.”
“I do. You men pulled off a great victory. Getting in as far as the mill to
support Domor and Haller’s squads. Lucky break for us all. I hear Gaunt’s
going to commend a bunch of you. Don’t tell him I told you.”
“It’s just well… Kolea was taking risks. Big risks. Crazy risks. Like he
didn’t care if he lived or died. I mean, he was insane. Running into enemy
fire. It was a miracle he wasn’t hit.”
“Some men deal with battle that way, Varl. I refer you to our previous
conversation about Corbec.”
“I know, I know.” Varl struggled for the words. “But this wasn’t brave.
This was… mad. Really fethed up. So mad, I said something to him, said I’d
tell Gaunt what a crazy stunt he’d pulled. And he swore me not to. Begged
me not to.”
“He’s modest—”
“Doc, Gol lost his wife and his kids on Verghast. I think… I think he
doesn’t care anymore. Doesn’t care about his own life. I think he’s looking
for the reunion round.”
“Really?”
“I’m sure of it. And if I’m right, he’s not only going to get himself dead,
he’s going to become a risk to the men.”
“It’s good you told me this, Varl. Leave it with me for now. I’ll be
discreet. Let me know if you catch any more behaviour like it from him.”
Varl nodded and made his way out.
The canvas curtain behind Dorden slid back and Curth came through,
peeling off bloody surgical gloves and tossing them into a waste canister.
“I didn’t know you were there,” Dorden said.
“Assume I wasn’t.”
“That was a confidential chat, Ana.”
“I know. It’ll stay that way. I’m bound by the same oaths as you.”
“Good.”
“One thing,” she said, moving across to a trolley rack and sorting through
data-slates. “What’s a reunion round?”
Dorden shook his head with a sigh. He scratched the grey stubble of his
chin.
“Guard slang. It means… it means Kolea doesn’t want to live without his
lost loved ones. His dead wife, kids. He wants to be with them again. And so
he’s throwing himself into every fight that comes along without heed for his
own safety, doing whatever he can do, until he finally catches that reunion
round he’s praying to find. The one that will kill him and reunite him with his
family.”
“Ah,” said Curth. “I had a nasty feeling that’s what it was.”
“What did you do?”
Caffran slowly rose to his feet mystified. The shackles linking his wrists
clanked and drew tight where they ran down to his ankle-hobble. He’d been
stripped down to his black vest and fatigue pants. His boot laces and belt had
been removed.
“What do you mean?” he asked. His voice was dry and thin. The air in the
dingy cell was damp and the light bad. A hunted look on Caffran’s face
showed that he was still dealing with the shock of the accusations.
“I mean what did you do? Tell me.”
“I didn’t do anything. I swear.”
“You swear?”
“I swear! Nothing! Why… why have you come here, asking me that?”
Kolea stared at him. The shadows made it impossible for Caffran to read
his expression.
Kolea was just a furious, threatening presence in the little cell.
“Because I want to know.”
“Why?”
Kolea took a menacing step forward. “If I find out you’re lying… if you
hurt that woman—”
“Sergeant, please… I didn’t do anything!”
“Sergeant Kolea!”
Kolea stopped a few paces from Caffran. He turned slowly. Silhouetted,
Gaunt stood in the cell doorway.
“What are you doing here, Kolea?” Gaunt asked, stepping into the cell.
“I—” Kolea fell silent.
“I asked you a question, sergeant.”
“The men in my troop were… concerned… about what Caffran had
done… I—”
Gaunt held up a hand. “That’s enough. You’re out of line being here,
Kolea. You should know that. Get out. Tell your men I’ll talk to them.”
“Sir,” Kolea murmured and left.
Gaunt took off his cap and swung round to look at Caffran. “Any idea what
that was about trooper?”
“No, sir.”
Gaunt nodded. “Sit down, Caffran. You know why I’m here.”
“To ask the same questions Kolea did, probably”
“And?”
Caffran slowly sat down on the cell’s ceramic bench. He cleared his throat
and then looked up, meeting Gaunt’s gaze. “I didn’t do it sir.”
There was a long silence. Gaunt nodded. “All I needed to hear, Caff.”
He walked back to the door and put his cap back on. “Keep your spirits
up, Caff. If it’s in my power to get you out of this, I will.”
“Thank you, sir.”
Gaunt stepped out into the brig hall. The Commissariate guards closed the
heavy door, threw the bolts and ignited the shield. They saluted Gaunt, but he
ignored them as he strode away.
In the rain, the mill-habs looked especially dismal. It wasn’t real rain,
naturally. Every two days, each section of the hab-district was sluiced with
water from the dome’s ceiling pipes. The idea was to maintain hygiene and
keep the streets washed down.
It simply made everything glisten with wet and smell like a stale toilet
stall.
The Flyte household had been boarded, and aquila seals stamped to the
doors. The kids had been sent to stay with neighbours.
He jumped over the back fence into the rear yard and looked about his
cloak pulled up over his head against the downpour. If the outhouse was well
roofed, then there might be some traces left to find. If it wasn’t the rain would
have rinsed everything of value away.
He looked around, peering in through the cracked rear windows of the hab.
All sorts of litter and broken debris was scattered in the weed-rife yard.
He went into the outhouse, breaking the aquila seal and ignoring the
stencilled Commissariate warning notice. Inside, it smelled of rotting
fibreboard and mineral waste. There was no light It wasn’t particularly
watertight but he could still see the dark stains on the wall, the floor, and the
rim of the old, battered tub. One was a handprint. A perfect handprint. A
woman’s.
He looked around. The rafters were low, and there was a gash in one of
them right above the bath. He took out a lamp pack and shone it up, probing
the cut with the tip of his Tanith knife, and carefully teased out a tiny sliver of
metal that he put in his hip pouch.
He sniffed the air. He sniffed the fibreboard wall. He got down on his
hands and knees and shone the lamp-pack under the tub. Something glinted.
He reached for it.
“Don’t move! Not a bloody centimetre!” Torchlight shone in at him.
“Out, slowly!”
He obeyed, keeping his hands in the open.
The young cadet commissar in the doorway looked very scared, an
automatic pistol aimed at him. But credit where credit was due. He’d come
up fething quietly.
“Who are you?” the cadet said.
“Sergeant Mkoll, Tanith First,” Mkoll replied quietly.
“Goosen? What’s going on in there?” shouted a voice outside.
An older man, another commissar in a long, dripping storm coat, appeared
behind the twitchy cadet. He almost took a step back in surprise when he saw
Mkoll.
“Who the hell are you?”
“One of the neighbours reported an intruder, sir,” said Goosen. “Said he
thought it was the killer come back.”
“Cuff him,” said the older man bluntly. “He’s coming with us.”
“May I?” Mkoll said, gesturing to his battledress pocket.
Goosen covered him carefully as Mkoll reached into the pocket and drew
out a folded document. He held it out to the older man.
“Signed authorisation from Colonel-Commissar Gaunt, my unit
commander. His instructions for me to conduct an evidential search of the
scene, pursuant to the case.”
The commissar looked it over. He didn’t seem convinced. “This is
irregular.”
“But it’s a fact. Can I lower my hands now?”
Goosen looked at the commissar. The older man shrugged.
“Let him be.”
The commissars looked round. Captain Ban Daur stood at the yard’s back
gate. He had no weapon drawn but, despite the rain, his coat was pulled back
for easy access to his bolstered laspistol.
Daur sauntered in, put his hand on Goosen’s weapon and slowly pointed it
down.
“Put it away,” he advised.
“Are you with him?” the commissar asked, indicating Mkoll.
“Yes, I am, Fultingo. Gaunt’s rostered a team of us to carry out a
regimental inspection of the case.”
“There’s no time. The execution is—”
“Postponed. Gaunt obtained a delay order from Commissar Del Mar’s
office an hour ago. We have a grace period to assess all the evidence.”
Fultingo sneered at Mkoll. “You sent a trooper into a crime scene?”
“Mkoll’s unit chief of the Tanith scouts. Sharpest eyes in the Imperium. If
there’s something to find, he’ll find it.”
“Who’s in charge of your investigation?” asked Fultingo. He looked angry,
thwarted. “I’m going to lodge a formal complaint. You, captain? No… Hark,
I’ll bet.”
“Gaunt has taken personal charge of the case,” said Daur. Mkoll had
lowered his hands and was inspecting the outside of the shed.
“Gaunt?” queried Fultingo. “Gaunt himself? Why is he bothering with
this?”
“Because it matters,” said Mkoll without looking round.
Fultingo stared at Daur, the dome-water dripping off his nose and capbrim.
“This is a criminal waste of resources. You haven’t heard the last of
it.”
“Tell someone who cares,” hissed Daur.
Fultingo turned on his jackbooted heel and marched out of the yard,
Goosen scurrying after him, kicking up wet gravel.
“Thanks,” said Mkoll.
“You were handling it.”
Mkoll shrugged. “Any progress?”
“Hark’s done what Gaunt asked him to do. Everything’s so tied up with red
tape, Caff’s safe for a few days. Dorden’s examining the victim’s body this
evening. Hark’s now circulating a questionnaire to the Ghosts just to see if
anything flags up.”
Mkoll nodded. Daur shivered and looked about. The artificial rain was
trickling to a stop, but the air was still filmy and damp. Steam rose from
heating vents and badly insulated roofing. Water stood in great, black mirrors
along the uneven street and in the ruts of the yard-back lane. Daur could
smell stove fires and the faint, unwholesome aroma of ration meals cooking.
Somewhere, children squealed and laughed as they played.
Although he couldn’t see them, Daur could feel the eyes in all the back
windows of the hab-street, eyes peering out from behind threadbare drapes
and broken shutters, watching them.
“Cakking miserable place,” Daur remarked. Mkoll nodded again and
looked up. “The worst kind. No sky.”
That made Daur smile. “Mkoll,” he said. “Since we’re out here, off the
record, as it were, you think Caffran did it?”
Mkoll turned his penetrating gaze round and directed it at the taller
Verghastite officer. Daur had always admired and liked the chief scout. But
for a moment, he was terrified.
“Caffran? Do you even have to ask?” said Mkoll.
“Yeah, right. Sorry.”
Mkoll wiped his wet face with a fold of his camo-cloak. “I’m done here,
sir.”
“Right. We can go back then. Did you turn up anything?”
“The prosecutors did a lousy job… unless someone’s been in there since.
They could have taken prints off the blood marks. Too late now, the damp’s
got in. But they missed… or ignored… a knife scar in the beams. I dug out a
shard of metal.”
“From the knife?”
“I think so. The frames of all these buildings are made of surplus ceramite
sheathed in paper pulp. The core’s hard enough to nick a blade. Whoever did
it was in a frenzy. And has a notch in his knife.”
“Well, gak! That’s a start!”
“I know,” agreed Mkoll. “More interestingly, I found this. Right under the
tub.”
He held out his hand, palm up, and showed what he had found to Daur.
A gold coin.
“An Imperial crown?”
Mkoll smiled. “A defaced Imperial crown,” he said.
THREE
Lord General Van Voytz had chosen a generous High Gothic style manse in
the upper levels of Cirenholm’s primary dome for a command headquarters.
Painted eggshell green, and supported by some of the integral pillars that
rose up into the dome’s roof structure, the manse was one of forty that
overlooked a vast, landscaped reservoir complete with lawns and
woodlands of aug-cultivated trees.
This lakeland habitat, complete with pleasure yachts rocking in coves at
the timber jetties, had been the playground of Cirenholm’s wealthiest and
most influential citizens before the Blood Pact’s arrival. Two planetary
senators, a retired lord general, a worthy hierarch, six mill tycoons and the
city governor had all owned homes around the shore.
All of them were dead now. There was no one left to object to Van Voytz’s
occupation. Not that any of them would have. The liberating lord general had
power and, more crucially, influence over them all.
An Imperial transport speeder still wearing its invasion camouflage
skimmed Gaunt over the lake. Evening had fallen, and lights from the
shoreline twinkled out over the dark water. Despite the gloom, Gaunt could
see the burnt-out ruins of some of the properties, grim as skulls. He could
also see the silhouettes of crosses dotted along the shore. No one had found
the time yet to take down the murdered worthies of Cirenholm.
The speeder slowed and ran up the little beach in front of the manse in a
wash of spray. Shielding their eyes from the drizzle Urdeshi sentries waved
the vehicle in. The speeder crossed a lawn and some low box hedges and
settled on the arc of mica-shingled driveway outside the manse.
Gaunt stepped out into the night air, pulling on his storm coat. He could
smell the water and the fading ozone reek of the cooling engines. Two staff
limos were pulling away from the front steps, and speeder bikes and other
Imperial transports sat parked under wet trees.
There were more sentries on the steps. Two of them, and Van Voytz’s
junior aide hurried down to meet him.
“The lord general is waiting for you in the library, colonel-commissar. Go
through. Have you eaten?”
“Yes, with the men.”
“A drink then?”
“I’m fine.”
Gaunt walked into the light of the hall. It was a stunning interior of
polished rethuric panels, gold-laced shaniffes and displays of antique
porcelain. He wondered how the hell any of this had survived unbroken.
The trompe l’oeil ceiling showed him vistas of the Empyrean, complete
with dogged starships. The hall floor was piled with Guard-issue locker
crates and roll-bags full of clothes.
“Through here,” the aide said.
Gaunt passed a side room which was bare apart from an enormous ormulu
fireplace and a single escritoire lit by a floating glow-globe.
The tactician, Biota, sat working at the desk, veiled by holo displays and
charts. He didn’t look up.
Two Urdeshi storm-troops hurried past in full kit. They broke step only to
salute.
The aide stopped outside a towering pair of gordian-wood doors. He
knocked briefly and listened to his micro-bead.
“Colonel-Commissar Gaunt,” the aide said into his vox-mic. A pause.
“Yes, sir.”
The aide opened the doors and ushered Gaunt inside.
As libraries went, this one was contrary. The huge, arched roof, three
storeys high, encased a wide room lined with shelves, with wrought iron
stairwells and walkways allowing a browser access to the upper stacks.
But the shelves were empty.
The only books were piled on top of a heap of army crates in the centre of
the parquet floor.
Gaunt took off his cap and wandered in. Lamps glowed from wallbrackets
and autonomous glow-globes circled and hovered around him like
fire-flies. At the end of the room, under the big windows, was a recently
unpacked tactical desk. Its power cables snaked off and were plugged into
floor sockets. A half-dozen library chairs were drawn up around it.
An open bottle of claret and several glasses, one half full, sat on a salver
on a side table.
There was no sign of Van Voytz.
Gaunt looked around.
“A tragedy, isn’t it?” said Van Voytz, invisible.
“Sir?”
“This house belonged to Air Marshal Fazalur, the father of our friend
Major Fazalur. A splendid soldier, well decorated, one of the planet’s
heroes. An even more splendid bibliophile.”
Van Voytz suddenly appeared from under the wide tactical desk. Just his
head and shoulders. He grinned at Gaunt and then disappeared again.
“Dead now, of course. Found his corpse on the beach. Most of his corpse,
anyway.” Van Voytz’s voice was partially muffled by the table.
“He had the most amazing collection of books, charts, data-slates and first
editions. A wealth of knowledge and a real treasure. You can tell by all the
empty shelves what size his collection was.”
“Extensive,” Gaunt said.
“They burned them all. The Blood Pact. Took all the slates, all the books,
ferried them out into the woodland behind the manse, doused them with
promethium, and burned them. There’s a huge ring of ash out there still. Ash,
melted plastic, twists of metal. It’s still hot and smoking.”
“A crime, sir.”
Van Voytz appeared again.
“Damn right a crime. Gaunt!” He reached over, took a swig of wine from
the glass, and then dropped out of sight once more.
Gaunt wandered over to the pile of books and lifted one. “The Spheres of
Longing… Ravenous greatest work. Feth, this is a first edition!”
“You’ve read Ravenor, Gaunt?”
“A personal favourite. They spared some things then? This volume alone
is priceless.”
“It’s mine. I couldn’t bear the place looking so empty so I had some of my
own library freighted up from Hessenville.”
Gaunt put the book down carefully, shaking his head. He couldn’t imagine
the sort of power that could order the Imperial Munitorium to fast ship a
person’s private book collection to him in a war zone. Come to that, he
couldn’t imagine the sort of power that would enable one to own a first
edition of The Spheres of Longing.
He glanced at some of the other books. The Life of Sabbat, in its folio
print. The Considerations of Solon, mint. Garbo Mojaro’s The Chime of
Eons. A perfect copy of Liber Doctrina Historicas. The complete sermons
of Thor, cased. Breaching the Darkness by Sejanus. An early quarto of the
Tactica Imperium, with foil stamps and plates complete. A limited issue of
Slaydo’s treatise on Balhaut, on the original data-slate.
“You like books. Gaunt?”
“I like these books, sir.”
Van Voytz emerged from under the desk and gave the display machine’s
cold flank a slap.
“Bloody thing!” He was clad in dress-uniform breeches and boots, but
stripped down to an undershirt. Gaunt saw the lord general’s tunic was hung
over the back of one of the chairs.
“They shipped this thing in,” said Von Voytz, sweeping up his glass and
sipping it as he flapped an arm at the tactical desk. “They shipped it in and
left it here. Did they plug it in and test start it? No. Can I get the holo-display
to work? No. I tried. You saw me under there.”
“It’s really a tech-magos’ job, sir.”
Van Voytz grinned. “I’m a lord general, Gaunt. I can do anything!” They
both laughed.
“Where are my manners?” said the general. He sloshed some of the
contents of the bottle into one of the empty glasses. Gaunt took it He realised
he was still holding the copy of the Tactica Imperium.
“Cheers,” said Van Voytz.
“Your health, sir. The Emperor protects.”
“You like that one?” Van Voytz asked, pointing at the book Gaunt was
holding.
“It’s beautiful—”
“Keep it. It’s yours.”
“I couldn’t. It’s priceless.”
“I insist. It’s mine to give. Besides, you deserve it. A gift to recognise your
efforts here on Phantine so far. I’m serious. Keep it.”
“I… thank you, sir.”
Van Voytz waved a hand. “Enough of that. Damn desk.” He took a sip of
claret and kicked the offending piece of furniture. “I had holo graphics of
Ouranberg to show you. The whole assault plan.”
“I could come back tomorrow, sir.”
“Don’t be silly, Gaunt. You’ve got your hands full. I’ll speak. You’ll listen.
You’ll get the gist. It’ll be like it was back in the days of Sejanus and Ponthi.
You’re Ponthi.”
“An honour, s—”
“I’m kidding, Ibram. Just kidding. I asked you here to talk about the
Ouranberg assault. Biota’s been totting things up, and he says I’m crazy. But I
have an idea. And it involves your mob.”
“So you said, sir.”
“Don’t look so… constipated, Ibram. You’ll like this. I had the idea when I
was reviewing your attack report. Damn fine men you’ve got there.”
“Thank you.”
“Good at stealth work. Smart. Capable. If we’re going to take Slaith down,
we’ll need all of that.”
Gaunt put the book back on the pile and gulped his drink. “It is Slaith then,
sir?”
“Oh, you betcha. Probably with loxatl mercenaries. Ouranberg’s going to
be a real party.”
Van Voytz refilled his glass. “Before we get into the planning, I hear
there’s a problem in your regiment.”
“A problem?”
“A fellow up on capital charges.”
“Yes sir. I’m dealing with it.”
“I know you are. And you shouldn’t have to. It’s a company level matter.
Just let him hang.”
“I can’t sir. I won’t.”
The lord general swigged his wine again and sat down on one of the
chairs. “You’re a regimental officer now, Gaunt. Trust your staff to deal with
it.”
“This matters to me, sir. One of my men has been falsely accused. I have to
clear him.”
“I know all about it. I spoke with Commissar Del Mar this afternoon. I’m
afraid you’re wasting your time, Ibram.”
“Caffran’s innocent, sir, I sw—”
This man… Caffran is it? He’s a dog soldier. A common trooper. The case
against him is las-proof.
“You have more important things to be devoting your time to.”
“With respect, lord, I haven’t. I stand where I stand today because of the
common dog soldiers. I would not be me without their efforts. And so I make
sure I look after every last one of them.”
Van Voytz frowned. “Well, shame on me—”
“Sir, I didn’t mean—”
Van Voytz waved his hand. “I’m hardly offended, Gaunt. Actually, it’s
refreshing to hear an officer remember the basics of good command. The
Imperial Guard is nothing without the Imperial Guardsmen. No one should
get so high and mighty they forget that. Your personal code of honour is
unusually robust. I just hope…”
“Sir?”
Van Voytz rose and started to put his jacket back on. “I was going to say I
hope it doesn’t get you killed. But, you know, it assuredly will. Eventually, I
mean. That’s the curse of a code of honour as resolute as yours, colonelcommissar.
Stick by it, and you’ll end up dying for it.”
Gaunt shrugged. “I always supposed that was the point, sir.”
“Well said,” Van Voytz replied, fiddling with the buttons of his hogging.
“Your dual role is a problem, though. Say the word and I’ll transfer you out
of the Commissariate. You’ll be Brigadier Gaunt… no, let’s not mess around,
shall we? You’ll be Lieutenant-General Gaunt, sectioned to me, Guard and
Guard alone. A full Imperial Guard officer with commissars at your beck and
call.”
Gaunt was mildly stunned.
“The uniform would suit you, Gaunt. Lieutenant-General, Tanith First-and-
Only. No more fussing over discipline matters. No more wasting command
time.”
Gaunt sat down. “I’m flattered, sir. But no. I’m happy where I am.”
Van Voytz shrugged. He didn’t seem put out. “If you say so. But don’t
dwell on this man Caffran, please. I won’t have it. Now… let me tell you my
ideas about Ouranberg…”
For all Dorden’s efforts with the powder, the lice had taken hold. While
fumigation crews filled the billets with noxious chemical clouds, the Ghosts
reported en masse to a grand municipal bathhouse in primary. Kit was
stripped off for steam-cleaning, and the troops, shivering in their shorts and
vests, lined up in the cold stone atrium to have their heads shaved. The buzz
of three dozen clippers filled the air above the chatter. Servitors shunted
back and forth, sweeping up the hair for incineration.
Once shaved, the troops were sent through into the steaming shower blocks
armed with cakes of tar-soap, their boots slung by the laces around their
necks. On the far side of the shower blocks were halls lined with rush mats
where stiffly-old but clean towels were stacked. Munitorium aides stood by
at trestle tables piled with clean reserve kit that stank of yet more powder.
Gaunt and Daur walked into the drying halls and there was a general fuss
and shuffling as naked or half-dressed troops tried to come to attention.
“As you were,” Gaunt called out, and they relaxed back to their ablutions.
Gaunt nodded to Daur and the captain consulted a data-slate.
“Listen up,” Daur called out. “If you hear your name, get dressed and
assemble at the exit. I’ll only call this once…”
Still toweling off their newly bald heads, the troops paid attention.
“Mkvenner! Doyl! Bonin! Larkin! Rilke! Nessa! Banda! Meryn! Milo!
Varl! Cocoer! Kuren! Adare! Vadim! Nour! That’s it! Fast as you like!”
Larkin was tugging a clean black vest over his bony torso and scowled at
Bragg as he heard his name called. “Oh, what now?” he grumbled. Larkin
looked mean and cadaverous with his hair cropped.
“What have you done, Larks?” Bragg chuckled.
“Fething nothing!” snapped Larkin, struggling to pull on starch-stiff fatigue
pants. Buckling his belt, he shuffled over to join the others in unlaced boots.
“That’s everyone,” said Daur to Gaunt and the colonel-commissar nodded.
Painfully aware of the shaven heads around him, Gaunt pointed to his own
hair. “Don’t worry, it’s my turn next,” he said. “Lice have no respect for
rank.” The Ghosts smiled. They all looked like raw recruits again, their
scalps unhealthy white. Gaunt felt especially sorry for the women.
“Very well,” he said. “Imperial Command has assigned an operation to us.
Details later, for now it’s enough for you to know the lord general conceived
it himself and considers it a critical mission. Its successful execution has
priority over all other Imperial operations at this point.”
A few eyes widened. Larkin made a soft, disheartened moan. Banda
elbowed him.
“I’ve personally selected you all for this operation, for reasons that will
become obvious to each of you. The operational name is Larisel. You will
not speak about it in general or specific terms to anyone, even other Ghosts
outside this group. I want you all assembled at sub-hangar 117 by 18.30 with
full kit gear and personal effects. I mean everything, prepped for transport.
You won’t be going back to the billet.”
“Is that because this is a… one-way mission?” asked Varl euphemistically.
“I won’t lie, sergeant. Larisel will be ultra-high risk. But the reason you
won’t be going back to the regimental billet is that I’m moving you all to
secondary billet for speciality training and mission-specific instruction.
Okay?”
There were mumbles and nods.
“Any questions? No? Okay, good. I have supreme confidence in you all:
your abilities and your characters. I’ll say it again before you get underway,
but good fortune to you all. The Emperor protects.”
Gaunt glanced round at Daur. “Anything you want to add at this stage,
captain?”
“Just one thing, sir.” Daur stepped to the front, reaching one hand into the
patch pocket of his black tunic jacket. “Regarding Trooper Caffran. As you
know, we’ve been doing the rounds, asking questions, collecting data. I fully
expect some valuable information to come out that way. Word of mouth,
trooper to trooper. But from here in, you’re going to be effectively separated
from the regimental main force, so there’s going to be much less opportunity
to keep you in the loop as far as the ongoing investigation is concerned.
Therefore, for now… I want to inspect everyone’s warknife. I want to hear
from any of you who has noticed notching or damage to the warknives of any
other trooper. And has anyone seen one of these before?”
He took a small waxed envelope from his pocket, opened it and held up a
gold coin.
“Imperial crown, local issue… purposely defaced on both head and
reverse. Does anyone have one like it? Does anyone know anything about its
origin? Does anyone know of another trooper who has one? If you’re
uncomfortable about speaking out now, see me, or the colonel-commissar, or
Commissar Hark, in confidence. That’s all.”
“Dismissed,” Gaunt said.
The group broke up, muttering to one another. Daur and Gaunt turned
together and walked off down the outer hall.
“I’ve got hopes about the coin,” confided Daur. “We already know from a
dozen Ghosts, including Obel and Kolea, that there were more of the same in
the business premises of the adjacent mill sector. But all of them swear they
left the coins well alone because of the markings.”
“We’ll see. If anyone did get greedy, he’ll not want to admit it. They know
how strict I am about looting. Did you check Caffran’s blade?”
Daur sighed. “It’s notched. He said it happened during the firefight in the
park at 505, but we’ve only got his word. Del Mar’s staff will be all over
that like a bad rash if it gets out.”
“Then don’t let it out,” said Gaunt. “They’ve got all the rope they need as
it is. Don’t give them any more.”
“What do we do?” Larkin whispered anxiously to Bragg as he finished lacing
up his boots. Bragg leaned beside him, pulling on his vest.
“We tell Gaunt,” Bragg answered simply.
“We can’t!”
“Why not?” Bragg asked.
“Because we don’t betray our own. I’ve never been a rat in my life, and I
don’t intend to start now.”
“I don’t think that’s the reason, Larks,” Bragg said. He smiled. “We’d rat if
it got Caffran off. No, I think you’re scared of him.”
“I am not!”
“I think you are. I know I am.”
Larkin’s eyes widened. “You’re scared of Cuu?”
“All right, not scared exactly. But wary. He’s a mean piece of work.”
Larkin sighed. “I’m scared of him. He’s a maniac. If we report him, and he
gets off later, he’ll come for us. He’ll fething come for us. It’s not worth it.”
“It’s worth it to Caff.”
“I’m not crossing Cuu. Not for anything. There’s something about him.
Something sick. He could go to the firing squad and then come back and haunt
me.”
Bragg laughed.
“You think I’m joking.”
Bragg shook his head. “Cuu’s a fething maniac, Larks. If anyone in this
mob is capable of that killing, it’s him. If he’s guilty, we don’t have to worry
about it. If he’s innocent, well, then he gets off. And honestly, what would he
do then? Kill us? Get off a murder charge and then commit a double
murder?”
“I’m not doing it,” Larkin hissed firmly. Bragg fingered the new, pink skin
healing on the gash in his shoulder. “Then I might,” he said. “He’s no friend
of mine.”
The billet hall was fairly quiet except for the occasional cough or sneeze.
The sunk of the recent fumigation still clung to the air.
Milo expertly stowed the last of his kit in his backpack, lashed it shut and
then secured the tightly rolled tubes of his bed-roll and camo-cloak to it.
Vadim, already packed and ready to go, wandered over to him. “You ever
been picked for special ops before, Milo?”
“Some. Not quite like this.” Milo pulled on his tunic, checking the contents
of the pockets, and then strapped on his webbing. “Sounds… high profile,”
he added, hooking his gloves to his webbing before rolling his beret and
tucking it through the epaulette of his tunic. He hoisted up his backpack,
shook the weight onto his shoulders and then did up the harness.
“Sounds suicidal to me,” Vadim muttered darkly. He rubbed his sandpaper
scalp. The lack of hair had altered the proportion of his head and made his
strong nose seem almost beak-like. He looked like a dejected crow.
“We’ll see, won’t we?” Milo said, cinching the sling of his lasrifle before
shouldering it. He inspected his makeshift cot one last time to make sure he
hadn’t left anything. “I tend not to worry until I know I’ve got something to
worry about.”
Fully prepped and weighed down with kit, Nour and Kuren moved across
the billet to join them. They shook hands and exchanged banter with other
Ghosts as they crossed the hall. None of them had explained where they were
going and no one had asked, but it was clear they were shipping out for some
special duty and that prompted numerous farewells and wishes of luck.
Kuren had put on his drop-issue balaclava, rolled up into a tight woollen
hat. “Fething lice,” he grumbled, “my fething head’s cold.”
“Set?” Milo asked the three of them. They nodded. It was just after 18.00
and time to leave.
Milo looked across to Larkin’s cot. The master sniper was finishing up his
almost obsessive prep on his gun, packing up the cleaning kit and sliding the
long foul-weather cover over the weapon. “Larks? You ready?”
“Be right there, Milo.”
Bragg sat down on the cot next door. “You… you have a good time now,
Larks.”
“Oh, funny.”
“Just… come back again, okay?”
Larkin noticed the look in Bragg’s eyes.
“Oh, I fething well intend to, believe me.”
Bragg grinned and held out a big paw. “First and Only.”
Larkin nodded and slapped Bragg’s palm. “See you later.”
He walked over to the others. Trooper Cuu, who had been lying on his
back gazing at the roof, sat up suddenly and grinned at Larkin as he went by.
“What?” asked Larkin, stopping sharply.
Still grinning, Cuu shook his head. “Nothing, Tanith. Not a thing, sure as
sure.”
“Come on, Larkin!” Nour called.
Larkin scowled at Cuu and pushed past him.
“Trooper Cuu!”
The sudden shout made the five troopers stop and turn. Hark had entered
the billet with Sergeant Burone and two other Ghosts. All three troopers
carried weapons. They marched down the aisle towards Cuu’s bunk.
“What’s this?” Vadim whispered. There was a general murmur of interest
all around.
“Oh feth,” Larkin mumbled.
Cuu got up, staring at the approaching detail, confused. “Kit inspection,”
Hark told him. “But I—”
“Stand aside, trooper. Burone, search his pack and bed-roll.”
“What is this?” Cuu blurted.
“Stand to attention, trooper!” Hark snarled and Cuu obeyed. His eyes
flicked back and forth as he stood there rigidly. “Pat him down,” Hark told
one of the men with him.
“This is out of order,” Cuu stammered.
“Silence, Cuu. Give me his knife.” The trooper frisking Cuu unbuckled
Cuu’s warknife from his sheath and passed it to the commissar. Hark
inspected the blade.
“Nothing, sir,” Burone reported. Cuu’s entire kit was spread out across his
cot, wherever possible taken apart. Burone was checking the lining of Cuu’s
backpack and musette bag.
“The blade’s clean,” Hark said, as if disappointed.
“He had it ground and sharpened the other day.”
Hark glanced round. Kolea stood prominently in the group of Ghosts who
had gathered to watch. “I saw him, sir,” Kolea said. “You can check with the
knife grinder.”
Hark looked back at Cuu. “True?”
“So fething what? It’s a crime to keep your blade sharp these days?”
“That insolence is pissing me off, trooper—”
“Sir…” the trooper frisking Cuu called. He yanked up the top of Cuu’s left
pant leg. A tight cloth bag was taped to his shin above the top of the boot.
Hark bent down and pulled the tape off. Coins, heavy and gold, spilled out
into his hand.
Turning the coins over, Hark rose again. He looked at Cuu.
“Anything to say?”
“They were just… no.”
“Take him in,” Hark told his detail.
Burone’s men grabbed Cuu. He began to struggle.
“This is unfair! This is not right! Get off me!”
“Behave! Now! Or things will get even messier!” Hark warned him.
Cuu stopped thrashing and the men frog-marched him forward. Hark and
Burone fell in behind. As they swept past Milo’s group, Cuu’s cat-eyes found
Larkin. “You? Was it you, you gak?” Larkin shuddered and looked away.
Then Cuu was being taken past Bragg. Bragg was smiling.
“You? You gak! You filthy gak! Big dumbo’s set me up! He’s set me up!”
“Shut up!” Hark roared and they swept him out of the hall. Bragg looked
across at Larkin and shrugged. Larkin shook his head unhappily. “Well that
was interesting,” Vadim said. “Yeah,” said Milo. He checked his watch.
“Let’s go.”
Sub-hangar 117 was low down on the west skirts of Cirenholm secondary,
close to one of the dome’s main recirculator plants. There was background
throb in the air, and a constant vibration. Extractor vents moved warm, linty
air down the access corridor and across the entrance apron.
By the time Varl arrived with Cocoer, it was almost 18.30 and most of the
others were already there. Banda and Nessa stood talking to the Tanith sniper
Rilke, and Corporal Meryn and Sergeant Adare sat on their kit-packs with
their backs to the wall, smoking lho-sticks and chatting. Doyl, Mkvenner and
Bonin, the three scouts, lounged over near the other wall in a huddle,
conversing privately about something. Secret scout lore no doubt Varl
thought.
“Boys,” he nodded to them and they returned his greeting.
“Hey, Rilke, girls,” he said approaching the snipers. He threw a brief
wave over at Adare and Meryn.
“We’re a few short, aren’t we?” said Cocoer, setting down his pack.
“Not for long,” Rilke said. Milo, Larkin and the others were approaching
along the rust-streaked tunnel.
“Well, what do we think, eh?” asked Varl. “Think Gaunt has arranged a
nice day out and a picnic for us?”
Banda snorted. Nessa, who had been deafened on Verghast, had to lip-read
and so smiled gently a heartbeat after Banda’s derisive noise.
“Let’s see… three scouts, four snipers, and eight dog standards like me
and Cocoer,” Varl said, looking around. “What does that sound like to you?”
“It sounds like an infiltrate and sanction detail,” said a voice from behind
him. Mkoll strode purposefully up onto the apron, his field boots ringing on
the metal plating. “And it’s four scouts, actually. I’m in this too.” Like all of
them, Mkoll wore full matt-black fatigues and high-laced boots, and heavypouched
webbing, with a full field kit and weapons on his back. The sleeves
of his tunic were neatly rolled up past the elbows. He did a quick head count
and then consulted his wristwatch. “Everyone here and it’s bang on 18.30.
We got the first part right then.”
They followed him through the hatch into the hangar. It was cold and dim
in the echoey interior, and they could see little except for the area just inside
the hatch which was illuminated by a bank of overhead spots. Four men were
waiting for them in the patch of light.
They were all big, powerful young men wearing cream-coloured quilted
jackets and baggy, pale canvas pants bloused into the tops of high jumpboots.
The sides of their heads were brutally shaved, leaving just a strip on
their crowns. Not as a result of lice treatment, Varl thought. These men kept
their hair that way. They were Phantine troopers. Skyborne specialists.
Mkoll greeted them and the four Phantines snapped back smart salutes.
“Major Fazalur sends his compliments, sir,” said one with a silver bar on
his sleeve under the Phantine regimental patch. “He asked us to wait for you
here.”
“Fine. Why don’t you introduce yourselves?” Mkoll suggested.
“Lieutenant Goseph Kersherin, 81st Phantine Skyborne,” the large trooper
replied. He indicated his men in turn. “Corporal Innis Unterrio, Private first
class Arye Babbist, Private first class Lex Cardinale.”
“Okay. I’m Mkoll. Tanith First. You boys’ll get the hang of the others soon
enough.” Mkoll swung round and faced the waiting Ghosts. “Drop your packs
for now and loosen off. Let’s get you into groups. Four teams. Sergeant Varl,
you’re heading first team. Sergeant Adare, third team. Second team is yours,
Corporal Meryn. Fourth team is mine. Now the rest of you… Doyl, Nessa,
Milo, you’re with Adare. Mkvenner, Larkin, Kuren… Meryn. Varl gets
Banda, Vadim and Bonin. Which leaves Rilke, Cocoer and Nour for me.
Let’s group up so we get used to it. Come on. Good. Now, as you will have
spotted, each team contains a leader, a trooper, a sniper and a scout. The bare
minimum for light movement, stealth and insertion. None of us will enjoy the
back-up of a support weapons section or a flamer on this. Sorry.”
There were a few groans, the loudest from Larkin.
“So,” said Mkoll with what seemed like relish. “Let’s get onto the fun bit.
Lieutenant?”
Kersherin nodded and walked over to a dangling control box that hung
down from the roof on a long, rubber-sleeved cable. He thumbed several
switches. There were a series of loud bangs as the overhead light rigs came
on one after another, quickly illuminating the entire, vast space of the hangar
with cold, unfriendly light.
On the far side, rising some thirty-five metres above a floor layered with
foam cushion mats, stood a large scaffolding tower strung with riser cables
and pulleys.
“You see?” said Larkin to the Ghosts around him. “Now I do not like the
look of that.”
FOUR
The execution yard was an unprepossessing acre of broken cement, walled in
on three sides by high curtains of pockmarked rockcrete, and by the Chamber
of Justice on the fourth.
The Chamber of Justice, Cirenholm’s central law court and arbites
headquarters, had suffered badly during the Blood Pact occupation. The
uppermost floors of the tall, Gothic revival building were burnt out, and the
west end had been heavily shelled. Most of the office and file rooms were
ransacked. An immense chrome aquila, which had once hung suspended on
the facade over the heavy portico, had been shot away by determined stubber
fire, and lay crumpled and flightless on the main steps. On one side of the
entry court sat a chilling heap of dented arbites riot helmets, a trophy mound
raised by the Blood Pact after their defeat of the lightly armed justice officers
who had staunchly held out to the last to defend this sector of the city.
Despite all that, the prison block below ground was still functioning and it
was the only true high security wing that Cirenholm could offer, and so the
taskforce Commissariate had been forced to occupy the Chamber as best it
could.
From a window at the rear of the first floor, Gaunt looked down onto the
execution yard. The six-man firing squad, hooded and dressed in plain grey
fatigues that lacked patches, insignia or pins, took absolution from the
waiting Ecclesiarch official with routine gestures, and then lined up and took
aim.
There was no fuss or ceremony. The hawkish commissar in charge, a black
silk doth draped over his balding pate, raised a sabre and gave the command
in a tired voice.
The prisoner hadn’t even been blindfolded or tied up. He just cowered
against the back wall with nowhere to run.
Six las-shots, in a simultaneous flurry, spat across the yard and the
prisoner toppled, rolling back to slide clumsily down the wall. The presiding
commissar yelled out something else, and was already sheathing his sabre
and taking off his black doth as the squad filed off and servitors rolled a cart
out to collect the body.
Gaunt let the scorched brocade curtain fall back against the broken
window and turned away. Daur and Hark, who had been watching from the
neighbouring window, exchanged a few words and went to look for
something to sit on. Half-broken furniture was piled up along one wall of the
battered stateroom.
The tall, ten-panelled door opened and Commissar Del Mar strode in. He
was a lean man of advanced years, white-haired and reliant on augmetic limb
reinforcements, but he was still striking and imposing. A good hand-span
taller than Gaunt, he wore black dress uniform with a purple sash and a long
cloak lined with red satin. His cap and gloves were arctic white.
“Gentlemen,” he said immediately, “sorry to keep you waiting. Today is
full of punishment details and each one requires my authority and seal.
You’re Gaunt.”
“Sir,” Gaunt saluted and then accepted Del Mar’s handshake. He could
feel the rigid armature of Del Mar’s artificial hand through the glove.
“We’ve met I believe?” said Del Mar.
“On Khulen, the best part of a decade ago. I was with the Hyrkans then.
Had the pleasure of hearing you address the Council of Commissars.”
“Yes, yes,” Del Mar replied. “And also on Canemara, after the liberation.
Very briefly, at the state dinner with the incoming governors.”
“I’m impressed you remember that sir. It was… fleeting.”
“Oktar, God-Emperor rest his soul, had nothing but praise for you, Gaunt.
I’ve kept my eye out. And your achievements in this campaign have brought
you recognition, let’s face it.”
“You’re very kind, sir. May I introduce my political officer, Viktor Hark,
and Captain Ban Daur, acting third officer of my regiment.”
“Hark I know, welcome. Good to know you, captain. Now, shall we?
We’ve a busy morning of what might be described as testimonial sifting to get
through. Tactician Biota is here along with a whole herd of staff officers, and
Inquisitor Gabel is ready to present his working party’s findings.”
“One extra matter I’d like to deal with before we get down to business,”
said Gaunt. “The case of Trooper Caffran.”
“Ah, that. Gaunt, I’m surprised that—” Del Mar stopped. He glanced
round at Hark and Daur. “Gendemen, perhaps you’d give us a moment?
Fultingo?”
Commissar Fultingo appeared in the doorway. “Show the commissar and
the captain here to the session hall, if you would.”
Commissar Del Mar waited until they were alone. “Now then, this
Trooper Caffran business. I’ll be blunt it’s beneath you, Gaunt. I know I’m
not the first person on the senior staff to caution you about this. Commissar or
not, you’re an acting field commander, and you should not be occupying your
time or thoughts with this. It is a minor matter, and should be left to the
summary judgement of your commissar.”
“I have Hark’s support. I’m not going to back down. Caffran is a valuable
soldier and he’s innocent. I want him back in my regiment.”
“Do you know how many individuals I’ve had shot since we arrived,
Gaunt?”
“A half-dozen. That would be the average for a taskforce this size.”
“Thirty-four. True, twenty of those were enemy prisoners who we were
done with interrogating. But I’ve been forced to put to death seven deserters,
four rapists and three murderers. Most of them Urdeshi, but a few Phantine
too. I expect that kind of statistic. We command killers, Gaunt —violent,
dangerous men who have been trained to kill. Some snap and desert, some
attempt to slake their violent appetites on the civilian population, and some
just snap. Let me tell you about the murderers. One, a Phantine private,
wounded, went berserk and killed two orderlies and a nurse in the tertiary
hospital. With a gurney. I can’t begin to imagine how you kill someone with a
gurney, but I guess it took a great deal of rage. The second, an Urdeshi flametrooper,
decided to ignite a public dining house in secondary and toasted four
members of Cirenholm’s citizenry who had every right to believe the danger
was now past. The other, another Urdeshi, shot a fellow trooper during an
argument over a bed-roll. My justice was swift and certain, as the
honourable tradition of the Commissariate dictates and Imperial law
demands. Summary execution. I’m not a callous man, Gaunt.”
“I didn’t presume you were, commissar. Neither am I. As a sworn agent of
the Commissariate, I do not hesitate to dispense justice as it is needed.”
Del Mar nodded. “And you do a fine job, clearly. The Tanith First have a
nearly spotless record. Now one of them steps out of line, one bad apple. It
happens. You deal with it and move on. You forget about it and put it down as
a lesson to the rest of the men. You don’t tie up my office with demands for
grace periods and the constant deliberate interference of Commissar Hark.”
“Hark plagued you on my instruction, sir. And I’m glad he did. Caffran is
innocent. We managed to buy enough time to identify the real killer.”
Del Mar sighed. “Did you now?”
“He was arrested last night, sir. Trooper Cuu, another of my regiment. A
Verghastite.”
“I see.”
“Those Tanith that are alive today, sir, are alive because I plucked them
from their home world before it died. I consider them a precious resource. I
will not give up any of them unless I know for sure it’s right. This isn’t right.
Caffran’s blameless. Cuu’s the killer.”
“So… what are you asking me, Gaunt?”
“Release Caffran.”
“On your word?”
“On my recognisance. Try Cuu for the crime. The evidence against him is
far more damning.”
Del Mar gazed out of the window. “Well, now… it’s not that simple
anymore, Gaunt,” he said. “It’s not that simple because you’ve made an issue
of this. One crime, one suspect, that’s routine. One crime, two suspects…
that’s an inquiry. A formal one. You’ve forced this, Gaunt. You must have
realised.”
“I had hoped we might skip the formalities. Proceed to Cuu’s court-martial
and have done.”
“Well, we can’t. We now have to depose this Caffran first and clear him
and then try the other one. And given the impending attack on Ouranberg, I
don’t think you can afford the time.”
“I’ll do whatever it takes,” Gaunt said, “for victory at Ouranberg… and
for my men.”
Gaunt escorted Commissar Del Mar to the session hall where Inquisitor
Gabel’s briefing was set to begin. Gabel had been interrogating the captured
Blood Pact since the first day of occupation and was now ready to present
his findings so that the Taskforce’s senior officers and the strategic advisors
could deliberate how the data might impact the plans for the assault on
Ouranberg.
The session hall was a badly ventilated room packed with bodies, smoke
and bad odours, but it was the only room in the Chamber of Justice large
enough to contain the officers and support a large grade tactical holo-display.
Gesturing through the press of bodies, Gaunt brought Hark over to him.
“You’re excused this. I’ll stay and record the findings.”
“Why?” Hark asked.
“Because Del Mar’s not going for it. He’s insisting we clear Caff formally
before they commit Cuu. I need you out there, working up the case on my
behalf.”
“Ibram—”
“Dammit, Viktor, I can’t not be here now. They keep telling me I should
depend on my staff. Feth, you keep telling me. So go do it and do it well. I
want to expend no more than a morning on Caffran’s deposition. I can’t
afford any more. Van Voytz’s been talking about going on Ouranberg in less
than a week. Make a watertight case for Caff so we can get it done with
quickly and I can turn my full attention to the invasion.”
“What about Cuu?”
“Cuu can go to hell, and I wash my hands. Caffran’s my only concern. Now
get along and do it.”
Hark paused. There was a strange expression on his face that Gaunt had
never seen before. It was strangely sympathetic yet baffled.
“What?”
“Nothing,” said Hark. “They’re starting. I’ll go. Trust me, Ibram.”
“I do, Viktor.”
“No, I mean trust me to do this. Don’t change your mind later.”
“Of course.”
“Okay. Okay, then.” Hark saluted and pushed his way out of the room.
Gaunt shouldered his way over to Daur. “Everything okay, sir?”
“I believe so.”
A hush fell as Inquisitor Gabel, a cadaverous monster in matt-rose
powered plate armour, stalked to the centre of the room and activated the
tactical desk with his bionic digits. A hololithic display of Ouranberg city
flickered into life.
“Soldiers of the Emperor,” Gabel rasped through his vox-enhancer, “this is
Ouranberg, the primary vapour mill city on this world, a vital target which
we must recapture intact It is held by a minimum of five thousand Blood Pact
warriors under the personal command of the brute Slaith. We believe at least
three packs of loxad mercenaries support him. Now, here is what we have
learned from the interrogated enemy prisoners…”
Varl was falling to his death.
He yowled out in terror, tried to address his fall and snagged so that he
ended up dropping side on. Two metres from the ground, the counterweight
pulley began to squeal as it rode the cable and bounced him to a halt upside
down, with his head mere centimetres from the mat.
Lieutenant Kersherin walked over to him and knelt down in front of him.
“Know what that was, sergeant?”
“Uh… exhilarating?”
“No. Hopeless,” Kersherin rose and gestured to the waiting Unterrio to
clear Varl from the harness. Then he looked up at the figures perched on the
top of the tower.
“Next one in sixty seconds!”
Thirty-five metres up, Milo stood on the tower’s unnecessarily narrow and
flimsy stage, holding on to the rail with one hand. He was next. Banda,
Mkvenner and Kuren were waiting on the back of the stage behind him for
their turns.
The Phantine trooper with him, Cardinale, beckoned Milo over as the
pulleys were reset and the counterweight balanced.
He checked Milo’s harness and tightened one of the straps.
“Don’t look so worried. You’ve done this three times already. Why so
unhappy?”
“Because it’s not getting any better. And because I only own three pairs of
undershorts and we’re going for a fourth try.”
Cardinale laughed and hooked Milo up to the running line. “Remember,
face down, limbs out, even if that mat looks like it’s coming up really fast
Then curl in and roll as you land. Come on, show that loudmouth Varl how
it’s done.”
Milo nodded and swallowed. Holding on to the riser wires, he set first
one foot and then the other at the lip of the stage. What had they called it,
back in drop instruction? The plank? That had been bad enough, and those
practice towers had only been half the height. This tower was five metres
higher than the longest possible rope drop they could have made. Also, this
wasn’t roping. This was jumping. Jumping out into space, hands empty. No
one, not Mkoll, not Kersherin, had said anything to them yet about what
Operation Larisel was specifically about, but they were clearly training for
more than a long rope. The wires and cables and pulleys involved in this
training were simply there to provide the simulation. Where they were going,
it would be rope free.
And that, not the mats thirty-five metres underneath his toes, was the truly
alarming prospect.
Babbist, a dot below them, flashed a green bat-board.
“Go!” Cardinale said.
Milo tensed.
“Go! The Emperor protects!”
“I—”
Cardinale helpfully shoved him off the plank.
“Better,” noted Kersherin, watching Milo’s drop from a distance below.
Beside him, Mkoll nodded.
“Milo’s picking it up. Some of the others too. Nessa. Bonin. Vadim.”
“That Vadim’s a natural,” Kersherin agreed.
“He has a head for heights. Apparently used to work the top spires of
Vervunhive. That’s why Gaunt picked him for this. Meryn and Cocoer aren’t
too shabby either. And to my complete surprise, Larkin’s getting it too.”
“Self preservation, I think. Fear is a wonderful concentrator.”
“That much is certain.”
Milo was picking himself up and taking a jokey bow to the scattered
applause of his comrades. Banda had taken her place up on the plank.
“The weakest?” Mkoll asked.
“Oh, Varl and Adare, by a long way. Doyl is too stiff. Banda tries way too
hard and it throws her out. You could do with pulling your knees up.”
Mkoll grinned. “Duly noted. Can we get them ready in time?”
“Tall, tall order. Skyborne training was six months. We’ve got barely as
many days. We’ll do what we can. No sense in cutting any out now in the
hope of nosing out better candidates. We’d be starting over with them.”
“Here she goes,” Mkoll said, pointing.
They watched as Banda leapt off the tower and whizzed down on the
tension of the pulleys. It was cleaner, though she bounced hard on landing.
“That’s a lot better,” Kersherin remarked. “She’ll get there.”
A little later, once Mkvenner and Kuren had also made their fourth drops,
Kersherin gathered them round and sat them down on the mats in a semicircle.
Water bottles and ration wraps were passed out. There was a lot of
chatting and joking as adrenalin fizzed its way out of them.
“Listen up!” Kersherin said. “Theory time. Private Babbist?”
Babbist came forward to the front of the semi circle, and Unterrio hurried
in to deposit a field-kit sized crate in front of him before backing out.
Babbist opened the crate and lifted something out for them all to see. It
was a compact but heavy metal backpack with a fearsome harness that
included thigh loops, and a hinged arm with a moulded handgrip on the left
side. The backpack sprouted two blunt, antler-like horns from the shoulders
that ended in fist-sized metal balls. It was painted matt-green.
“What we have here, friends and neighbours,” said Babbist, patting the
old, worn unit, “is a classic type five infantry jump pack. Accept no
imitations. Formal spec, for those that need it, is Type Five Icarus-Pattern
Personal Descent Unit with dual M12 gravity nullers and a variable-vent
compressor fan for attitude control. Which, I gather, many of you need.”
There were some laughs, but the Ghosts’ attention was fixed on the device.
“Manufactured on Lucius forge world,” Babbist continued, “it’s the
standard Guard variant of the assault jump pack. Smaller and lighter, not to
mention more compact, than the heavy jobs used by the Adeptus Astartes.
The Marines, Emperor bless ’em, need heavier duty babies to hold them in
the air. Besides which, we’re not gods. We wouldn’t be able to stand up with
one of the Astartes packs yoked to us.”
Babbist leant the pack against his knees and opened his hands to his
audience. “Remember how in Fundamental and Preparatory they told you
your las was your best friend? Look after it and it’d look after you? Right,
forget that. This is your new best friend. Get to know him intimately or you’ll
end up a stain on the landscape. If your old friend the las complains, remind
him that without your new friend here, he’s not going to see any action.”
Larkin slowly raised a hand.
Babbist frowned, surprised, and glanced at Mkoll.
“Out with it, Larks,” Mkoll said.
“Uh… is this just an interesting little lecture to occupy our minds during
snack break… or should we conclude that at some point in our approaching
yet ever fething shortening future, we’re going to be strapped to one of those
things and thrown into the sky? Just asking. I mean, would we be right off the
mark in connecting the… thrilling wire jumps we’ve been making off that
lovely tower with a situation that combines one of those with a lot of
screaming and looseness of bowel?”
There was a well-judged pause. “No,” said Mkoll directly, and everyone,
even Larkin, laughed despite the spears of anxiety that suddenly stabbed
through them.
“I see Trooper Larkin has sussed out what Operation Larisel has in store
for you all,” said Babbist. “As a prize, he can come up here and help me
demonstrate this baby.”
Urged on by the Ghosts around him, Larkin got to his feet. “I’m not
jumping out of anything,” he said as he walked over to Babbist.
“Legs in the yokes, one step, two step…” Babbist said, directing Larkin’s
hesitant motions. “And up we go… good. Forestraps over your shoulders as
you take the weight.”
“Feth!” baulked Larkin.
“Hold it while I do up the waist cinch… okay, now feed those forestraps
over to me.” Babbist snapped the metal tongues of the shoulder strap buckles
into the spring-loaded lock that now rested against Larkin’s chest. “Then the
leg straps up like so…” These too clunked into the chest lock. “Right. Just
pull the yokes in a bit. That’s it. How does it feel?”
“Like Bragg is sitting on me,” Larkin said, staggering with the weight.
More laughing.
“The type five weighs about sixty kilos,” Babbist said. “I’m dying here,”
Larkin moaned, shifting uncomfortably.
“That’s sixty kilos dormant,” Babbist added. He reached over and pulled
down the pack’s hinged control arm. It now stuck out at waist height on
Larkin’s left side, the joystick handgrip extending vertically in exactly the
right place for his left hand to grasp it comfortably. The handgrip was a
finger-moulded black sleeve of rubber set on a collar of milled metal with a
fat red button sticking from its top.
“Let’s try it active,” said Babbist. He lifted a small plate marked with a
purity seal on the right flank of the pack and threw two rocker switches.
Immediately the pack began to whine and throb, as if turbine power was
building up inside it Babbist closed the plate again.
“Feth me!” Larkin said, alarmed.
“Relax,” said Babbist. “That’s just the fan rising to speed.” Babbist had a
gentle grip on the handstick. He softly depressed the red button.
“How’s that?”
“Holy—” Larkin stammered. “The weight’s gone. I can’t feel it anymore.”
“That’s because the antigrav units—” Babbist indicated the two metal
balls that projected out above Larkin’s shoulders on their blunt antlers, “are
taking the weight. The red button determines grav lift, people. I’m just
touching it and it’s taking the weight of the pack. A tad more—”
“Feth!” Larkin gurgled to more laughter. He had risen twenty centimetres
off the ground and hung there, feet dangling.
Babbist kept hold of the handgrip. “It’s touch sensitive. Depressing it just a
little, like this, gives Larkin hover. If he was, say, dropping at terminal
velocity, he’d probably need to depress it by two thirds for the same effect.”
“So he could jump from a drop, press that red button, and hover?” Milo
asked.
“Yes. And pushing the button all the way gives lift,” said Babbist. He
squeezed the button and Larkin rose again.
“It’s a subtle thing. You’ll get the hang of how much thumb pressure
works… deceleration, hover, lift. There’ll be time to practise. The other
aspect of the pack is direction. There’s a powerful compressor fan inside
there.” Babbist swung the floating Larkin around so they could see the pack
on his back. “Here,” he said, “and here, here, here, here, and here.” He
indicated louvres on the top, bottom and four corners of the pack. “Whether
you’re pressing the red button or not, angling the handgrip will direct the
internal fan via these ducts. In other words, you point the handgrip, like a
joystick, whichever way you want to go and the compressor fan will give you
the appropriate thrust.”
Babbist yanked on the grip slightly and Larkin gusted sideways slightly.
He yelped.
“The combination of controls means that you can jump from a ship, control
your rate of descent and manoeuvre yourself onto the target. Questions so
far?”
“How often do they fail?” Banda asked.
“Virtually never,” said Babbist.
“Call me Miss Virtually,” said Banda to a round of sniggering. “What
about crosswinds?” asked Mkvenner. “With enough practice, you’ll know
how to compensate for windshear with a balance of lift and directional
thrust”
“When do we get to have a go?” asked Vadim gleefully.
Viktor Hark set down his stylus and sat back in his chair. It was late, the
dome lights had dimmed, and his office, a makeshift corner of a machine
shop near the regiment billets, was getting cold.
Hark pushed aside the reams of notepaper and documents he had managed
to accumulate, and picked up a data-slate. His thumb on the speed-scroll
button, he surveyed the data. Caffran, Cuu, the evidence and witnesses for
and against each of them. He sighed and tossed the slate aside. “You haven’t
thought about Cuu, Gaunt,” he murmured to himself. “You’re so damn keen to
get Caffran freed, you haven’t thought about the consequences.”
Hark got to his feet, pulled on his leather storm coat and looked about for
his cap. Unable to locate it he decided he’d do without it. He walked to the
door, went out, locked it carefully behind him, and made off in the direction
of the stairs. No going back now.
“Gaunt?”
He halted in his tracks and looked down. “No, father, he’s not here.”
Zweil appeared below, moving up the staircase. “Oh, Viktor. I’m sorry. I
thought you were Ibram.”
“He’s out still, with Daur and Rawne. The second day of tactical
briefings.”
“A soldier’s lot is never done,” Zweil sighed. He had drawn level with
Hark and now sat down on the steps.
Hark paused. He hadn’t got time for this.
He’d have to make time. He sat down on the gritty stairs next to Zweil.
“How’re things?” Zweil asked.
“Bad. Next big show is coming up and we’re still tied down to the stuff
with Caffran and Cuu.”
“Caffran didn’t do it, you know,” Zweil said. “You have evidence?”
“Only the best kind,” Zweil tapped his forehead. “He told me. I believe
him.”
“That’s what we’re working on.” Hark said. “What about Cuu? Is he
clean?”
Zweil seemed to sulk.
“Father ayatani?”
“Cuu I don’t know,” Zweil said. “I’ve never met a man like him. I can’t
read him.”
“So he could be hiding something?”
“He could also be a difficult person to read. Everyone seems convinced
that Cuu is the guilty one.”
“He is,” said Hark.
“Maybe, Viktor.”
Hark tried to control his anxious breathing. “Father… how far would you
go?”
“On a date? I’m a man of the cloth! Although, it has to be said that in my
youth—”
“Forget your youth. Ayatani Zweil… you say you’re with us to answer the
spiritual needs of the men. In clerical confidence, I believe? Answer this—”
“Off you go.”
“A man is blameless, palpably so, but you’ve been instructed to prove that
innocence. And there is no solid proof you can find. How far do you go?”
“Is this about Caffran?”
“Let’s keep it hypothetical, father.”
“Well… if I knew an innocent man was going to be punished for something
he didn’t do, I’d fight it. Down to the wire.”
“With no proof?”
“Proof denies faith, Viktor, and without faith the God-Emperor is nothing.”
“So if you were convinced you were in the right, you’d fight to correct that
injustice however you could?”
“Yes, I would.” Zweil was quiet for a while, studying the profile of Hark’s
face. “Is this about Caffran?” he repeated.
“No, father.” Hark got up from the steps and walked away.
“Viktor? Where are you going?”
“Nowhere that needs to concern you.”
FIVE
The court chamber was nothing special. A square room hung with black
drapes. A raised stage in the centre of the room, with seats and long desks on
three sides for the opposing councils and the presiding officials. No banners,
no standards, no decoration. It was depressingly banal and plain,
depressingly rudimentary.
Gaunt took his seat on the defence side with his adjutant Beltayn and
Captain Daur. There were four chairs, but no one had seen Hark since the
previous night. The prosecution council — Fultingo and two aides —
arranged themselves opposite Gaunt. A Commissariate clerk was laying out
papers on the court table while another adjusted and set the vox/pict drone
that hovered at the edge of the platform to document the proceedings.
“All rise and show respect!” one of the clerks announced, and chairs
scraped back as Commissar Del Mar and two senior commissars strode in
and took their places behind the centre table.
“Be seated,” said Del Mar curtly. He flicked through the papers laid out in
front of him and handed a data-slate to one of the clerks.
“I have a time of 09.01 Imperial, 221.771 M41. Mark that. Court is now in
session. Clerk of the court, please announce the first case on the docket. Let
the accused be brought in.”
“Imperial Phantine Taskforce, courts martial hearing number 57, docket
number 433.” The clerk read from the slate in a loud, nasal voice. “Trooper
Dermon Caffran, 3rd Section, Tanith First Light Infantry, to answer a charge
of murder, first degree.”
As he was speaking, armed Urdeshi soldiers walked Caffran into the hall
and stood him in the middle of the open side of the stage facing Del Mar. His
wrists were manacled, but he had been allowed to shave and put on his
number one uniform. He looked pale but determined. In fact, his face looked
strangely expressionless. Lad’s scared stiff, Gaunt thought. And no wonder.
He nodded to Caffran and the young man made a very brief, nervous
response, a little tilt of his chin.
There was something odd about Caffran, and it took a moment for Gaunt to
realise it was the fact that the boy still had thick hair. Locked away, he’d
missed the shearing and fumigation. Gaunt smiled to himself wryly, feeling
the itch of his own fresh-shaved scalp.
“Where’s Hark?” he whispered aside to Daur.
“Damned if I know, sir.”
Del Mar cleared his throat. “A word to both councils before we get into
this. I don’t wish to appear as if I’m diminishing the gravity of the crime, but
this case has become unnecessarily protracted. I want it finished. Speedily.
That means no delaying antics, and a minimum of witnesses.” Del Mar made
a light gesture in the direction of the papers in front of him, one of which was
the call-list of witnesses Gaunt had submitted to the clerk. “No character
witnesses. Expert and eye witnesses only. Is that clear, colonel-commissar?”
“Yes, sir.” It was clear. Gaunt didn’t like it but it was clear. Bang went the
majority of names on his list.
“And you, Fultingo,” said Del Mar. “I expect decent procedure from you
too. Don’t start in on anything that will provoke the defence council into…
digressions.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Read the particulars, please.”
The clerk rose again. “Be it known to the courts martial that on the night of
214 last, citizen Onti Flyte, resident of the Cirenholm South Mill second shift
workforce housing, was assaulted and stabbed to death in her place of
habitation.”
“Commissar Fultingo?”
Fultingo rose to his feet, and took a data-slate from his aide. “Onti Flyte
was a widow and a mother of three. Like all the residents of that district, she
had just been rehoused by the liberation forces, following detention under the
enemy occupation. The resident families were brought back to the South Mill
habitat under escort during the course of that evening. Only a short while
after returning to her home — we judge somewhere between 21.50 and 23.00
— she was attacked and murdered in her outhouse. The murder was
committed using a long, straight knife, matching in all particulars the
distinctive warknife carried by all Tanith infantry. An individual fitting the
description of a Tanith trooper was seen leaving the vicinage at that time.
The victim’s eldest son, Beggi Flyte, later positively identified Trooper
Caffran as the assailant. Deployment logs for the night show that Trooper
Caffran was one of the escort detail assigned to South Mill.”
Fultingo looked up from the slate. “In short, lord commissar, there seems
to be little room for doubt. We have the right man. I urge you to rule so that
punishment may be carried out.”
He sat down. Caffran hadn’t moved. “Gaunt?” Del Mar invited.
Gaunt got up. “Lord, no one, not even Caffran himself, denies that he was
present in the area that night. Furthermore, Caffran admits seeing and
speaking with the victim and her family. He remembers escorting her to her
home and making sure she was settled. The prosecution depends squarely on
the identification made by the victim’s son. The boy is very young. Given the
terrible stress suffered by all Cirenholmers during the occupation, and adding
to that the ghastly death of his mother, he is deeply, pitifully traumatised. He
may easily have identified the wrong man. He had seen Caffran close up
during the rehousing. When asked to pick out a Tanith trooper, he chose
Caffran because he was the only one whose face he clearly recognised. I
move we drop the charge and release Trooper Caffran. The real killer is yet
to be prosecuted.”
Fultingo was back on his feet before Gaunt had even sat down. “There we
have the whole meat and drink of it lord commissar. Gaunt expects us to
believe this bright intelligent boy would forget the face of his mother’s killer,
and simply recall the face of a soldier who helped them briefly earlier the
same night. We really are wasting time. A mass of circumstantial evidence
points to Trooper Caffran, and the positive ID clinches it. The defence can
offer nothing, I repeat nothing substantial in the way of evidence to contradict
the prosecution’s case. Just this whimsical theory of trauma-related mistaken
identity. Please, sir, may we not simply end this now?”
Del Mar waved Fultingo back into his seat and looked at Gaunt. “I am
tempted to agree, Gaunt. Your point has some merit but it’s hardly an ironclad
defence. The soldier admits that he was ‘helping out in the area until about
midnight’. Many saw him, but not so positively or for so long that he could
not have found the time to carry out this heinous act. If you’ve nothing else to
add, I will close the session.”
Gaunt stood up again. “There is one piece of evidence,” he said. “Caffran
couldn’t have done it With respect to your comments about character, I have
to insist on stating the fact that Caffran is a sound, moral individual with a
spotless record. He is simply not capable of such a crime.”
“Objection,” growled Fultingo. “You’ve already said character has no
relevance, lord.”
“I am aware of what I said, commissar,” Del Mar replied. “Seeing as
Gaunt has chosen to ignore my instruction, may I remind him that for all his
spotless character, Caffran is a soldier He is a killer. Killing is not beyond
him.”
“Caffran serves the Emperor as we all do. But he understands the
difference between killing on a battlefield and predatory murder. He could
not do it.”
“Gaunt!”
“Lord, would you send a basic infantryman to crew a mortar or a missile
rack? No. He wouldn’t have the ability. Why then would you maintain so
staunchly that Caffran had done something he simply doesn’t have the moral
or emotional ability to undertake?”
“That’s enough, Gaunt!”
The door at the back of the room opened suddenly and Hark hurried in. As
quietly as possible, he took his seat next to Gaunt.
“My apologies,” he said to the court.
“You might as well have not bothered showing up at all, Hark. We’re done
here.”
Hark rose and handed a slip of paper to the clerk, who brought it round to
Del Mar.
“Craving your patience, lord commissar, I submit the name of one last
witness to be appended to the list.”
Gaunt looked surprised.
“Objection!” snapped Fultingo.
“Overruled, Fultingo,” said Del Mar reading the slip. “It’s late and it’s
annoying, but it’s not against the rules. Very well, Hark, with Colonel-
Commissar Gaunt’s permission, let’s see what you’ve got.”
It was cold out in the gloomy hall outside the courtroom. Tona Criid sat on a
side bench under an oil painting of a particularly ugly Chief of Arbites and
fidgeted. She’d come to give Caff her support, maybe even speak up for him
if she was allowed, although Daur had advised her that character witnesses
were unlikely to be heard.
But she hadn’t even been permitted to observe.
Dorden was with her. He’d come to read his statement on the examination
of the body if that proved relevant. And Kolea was there too. He was sitting
right down at the end of the hall on his own. She wasn’t sure why. Caff’s
section leader was Major Rawne. She supposed that with Rawne busy
running the regiment up to speed, Kolea had been sent in his stead as a
serving officer to bear witness to Caff’s good character.
“It’ll be fine,” said Dorden, sitting down next to her. “Really,” he added.
“I know.”
“Who’s that man, do you think, doc?” she added after a moment,
whispering.
A hunched, elderly civilian sat on the benches opposite them.
He’d arrived a few minutes before with Commissar Hark, who’d set him
on the seat and hurried into the court chamber.
“I don’t know,” said Dorden.
The court door opened and Criid and Dorden looked up expectantly. A
clerk looked out. “Calling Cornelis Absolom. Cornelis Absolom. Is he
present?”
The old man got up and followed the clerk into the court.
“State your name for the record.”
“Cornelis — ahm!—Cornelis Absolom, sir.”
“Occupation?”
“I am retired, sir. These last three years. Before that I worked for
seventeen years as a night watchman at the vapour mill gas holders.”
“And how did you get that post Mr. Absolom?”
“They were looking for a man with military training. I served nine years in
the Planetary Defence Force, Ninth Phantine Recon, but I was injured during
the Ambross Uprising, and left the service.”
“So it’s fair to say you are an observant man, Mr. Absolom? As a night
watchman and before that, in the recon corps?”
“My eyes are sound, sir.”
Commissar Hark nodded and walked a few paces down the stage
thoughtfully.
“Could you describe to the lord commissar and the court your relationship
with the deceased, Mr. Absolom?”
“Ma’am Flyte was my next door neighbour.”
“When was the last time you saw the deceased?”
The old man, who had been given a chair to sit on because of his unsteady
legs, cleared his throat.
“On the night of her murder, Commissar Hark.”
“Could you describe that?”
“We had just returned to the habs. The place was a mess, a terrible mess. I
wanted to sleep, but I had to sweep out my parlour first. The smell… I was
in my backyard and I saw her over the fence. She was going to the outhouse.
We exchanged a few words.”
“About what, Mr. Absolom?”
“The mess, sir.”
“And you didn’t see her again?”
“No, sir. Not alive.”
“Can you tell the court what happened later that night Mr. Absolom?”
“It wasn’t much afterwards. I’d filled a sack with rubbish, mostly food that
had rotted in my pantry. I went out into the yard to dump it down by the back
fence.
“I heard a sound from Ma’am Flyte’s outhouse. A thump. Followed by
another.
“I was worried, so I called out.”
“And then?”
“A man came out of the outhouse. He saw me at the fence, and ran off
down the back lane.”
“Can you describe the man?”
“He was wearing what I know now to be the uniform of the Tanith First
sir. I had seen them earlier that night. They escorted us back to our homes.”
“Did you see the man’s face?”
Absolom nodded.
“Please voice your answer for the vox-recorder, Mr. Absolom,” Del Mar
prompted softly.
“I’m sorry, lord. Yes, I did. I did see him. Not clearly, but well enough to
know him.”
“Mr. Absolom, was it the accused, Trooper Caffran?”
The old man shuffled round to take a look at Caffran.
“No sir. The man was a little taller, leaner. And older.”
Hark looked back at Commissar Del Mar. “No further questions, lord.”
Fultingo got up at once. “Mr. Absolom. Why did you not come forward
with this information earlier? You raised the alarm and alerted the authorities
about the death. You were questioned, by me and my assistant, and claimed
not to have seen any suspect.”
Absolom looked down the stage to the commissar. “May I be honest,
lord?”
“This court expects no less, sir,” said Del Mar.
“I was scared. We’d been through weeks of hell at the hands of those
heathens. Ma’am Flyte didn’t deserve what happened to her, no sir, but I
didn’t want to get involved. The tough questions of the commissars, the
searches… and I didn’t want to risk the man coming back.”
“To silence you?”
“Yes, lord. I was terribly afraid. Then I heard a man had been arrested and
I thought, that’s an end to it.”
Del Mar had been scribbling a few notes. He put the holo-quill back in its
power-well. “Your answers have a ring of truth to them, Mr. Absolom.
Except for one thing. Why did you come forward now?”
“Because Commissar Hark came to see me. He said he thought they might
have the wrong man. When he showed me this lad’s picture, I knew he was
right. You hadn’t caught the killer at all. I came forward today so that justice
would not let this young man down. And because I was afraid again. Afraid
that the real killer was still at large.”
“Thank you, Mr. Absolom,” Del Mar said. “Thank you for your time and
effort. You are excused.”
“Lord, I—” Fultingo began.
Del Mar held up a hand. “No, Fultingo. In the name of the God-Emperor of
Terra, whose grace and majesty is everlasting, and by the power invested in
me by the Imperial Commissariate, I hereby declare this case concluded and
the accused cleared of all charges.”
From the court doorway, Gaunt watched Criid hugging Caffran, and Dorden
shaking the young man’s hand. He turned to Daur and Beltayn.
“Thanks for your efforts, both of you. Beltayn, take Caffran back to the
billet and see he has a good meal and a tot of sacra. Give him and Criid
twelve-hour liberty passes too. He’ll want to see his kids.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Ban, escort Mr. Absolom back to his home and repeat my thanks.”
“I’d like that duty, Ibram,” Hark said. “I promised the old man a bottle of
beer and the chance to tell me his war stories.”
“Very well.” Gaunt faced Hark. “You pulled it off.”
“I did what was asked of me, Ibram.”
“I won’t forget this. Caffran owes his life to you.”
Hark saluted and made his way over to the old man.
“The clerk tells me Cuu’s trial has been set for tomorrow morning, sir,”
said Daur. “They want that cleared away too. Shall I prepare the defence
notes?”
“I won’t be defending.”
Daur frowned. “Sir?”
“Cuu’s guilty. His crimes nearly cost us Caffran. The Commissariate can
deal with him. I’ll have Hark cover the formalities.”
“I see,” said Daur stiffly.
Gaunt caught his arm as he began to move away. “You have a problem,
captain?”
“No, sir. Cuu’s probably guilty, as you say. I just thought—”
“Ban, I regard you as a friend, and I also expect all my officers to be open
with me on all matters. What’s on your mind?”
Daur shrugged. “You just seem to be dismissing Cuu. Leaving him to his
fate.”
“Cuu’s a killer.”
“Most likely.”
“He’ll get justice. The justice he deserves. Just like Caffran did.”
“Yeah,” said Daur. “I guess he will.”
Down at the end of the hallway, Kolea watched the people spilling out of
the court. He saw Caffran embracing Criid and the smiles on the faces of
Daur and Gaunt.
He sighed deeply and went back to the billet.
Gaunt pushed open the hatch to sub-hangar 117 and went inside. The cargo
servitor escorting him followed, carrying the munition crate. The servitor
wore the painted insignia of the Munitorium on its torso casing.
It was cold inside the hangar, and for a moment, Gaunt thought he had
come to the wrong place. There were a few equipment packs and lasrifles
heaped up along one wall, but no sign of anybody.
Then he looked up.
Twenty human figures were floating and bobbing up in the rafters of the
hangar.
One saw him, turned and swooped down. As he approached, Gaunt heard
the rising whine of a compressor fan. The man executed a decent turn and
landed neatly on his feet, taking a few scurrying steps forward to slow
himself. Gaunt recognised him as Lieutenant Kersherin.
Keeping his left hand on the jump-pack’s control arm, the Skyborne
specialist threw a neat salute.
“Colonel-commissar!”
“Stand easy, lieutenant. You seem to be making progress.”
“At a variable rate. But yes, I’d say so, sir.”
“I’d like to talk to them. If they’re not too busy.”
Kersherin said a few words into his micro-bead and the floating figures
began to descend. The three other Phantines made perfect, experienced
landings. The Ghosts mostly made hesitant groundfalls, though Vadim, Nessa
and Bonin reached the ground like experts. Varl and Adare thumped down
hard and clumsily and made Gaunt wince.
They helped each other off with their jump packs, and the Skyborne
trainers went round to double-check all the circuits had been shut down
properly.
“Gather in,” said Gaunt. He slid a chart out of his pocket and began to
unfold it. They grouped around in a half-moon.
“First of all, I thought you’d like to know that Caffran was cleared of all
charges this morning.”
There were appreciative claps and cheers from the Ghosts.
“Next thing. More important to you. The time’s come to tell you a little
more about Operation Larisel. You’ve worked out by now that it’s going to
involve a grav-drop. And I’m sure you’ve guessed the target.”
Gaunt opened out the chart and laid it on the floor.
“Ouranberg, the primary target here on Phantine. A city five times larger
than Cirenholm. Well defended. Strongly garrisoned. Not an easy target, but
that’s why they give us shiny medals.”
The Ghosts peered in to get a look at the chart of Ouranberg’s sprawling,
multi-domed plan.
“You’ll get copies of this soon, and the chance to get decent familiarisation
on a holo-simulation. For now, this is the target. Or rather, where the target
can be found. Operation Larisel, as the name doubtless suggests to the Tanith
amongst you, is a hunting mission. A grav drop, a stealth insertion and then a
hunt.”
“What for?” asked Varl.
“In about a week, the taskforce will begin its assault on Ouranberg. The
strength of resistance will depend on the morale and spirit of the Blood Pact
and their allied units. At the moment, that’s very high. Unbreakably high,
perhaps.
“The rumours you may have heard are true. The enemy forces at Ouranberg
are personally commanded by the Chaos General Sagittar Slaith, one of
Warlord Urlock Gaur’s most trusted lieutenants. His foul charismatic brand
of leadership inspires almost invincible devotion and loyalty from his troops.
If we move against a dug-in force under his command, the cost will be high,
punishing. Even if the assault is successful, it will be a bloodbath. But if
Slaith is removed from the equation, we face a much more vulnerable foe.”
Gaunt paused. “The purpose of Operation Larisel is to locate Slaith and
eliminate him in advance of the invasion. To decapitate the enemy forces and
break their spirit right at the start of the main military advance.”
No one said anything. Gaunt looked at their faces, but they were all taking
this in and their expressions gave nothing away.
“Briefings on how to locate and identify Slaith will follow in the next day
or so. We have a lot of data that we think will be invaluable to you.
Operation Larisel will take the form of four teams — I believe you’re
already divided up - that will deploy to different insertion points in the city.
Four mission teams, coming in from four different angles. Four times the
chance of success.”
Gaunt turned to the crate that the waiting servitor was carrying and popped
open the lid. “One last thing for now, something to factor in to your training.
It’s been confirmed, I’m sorry to say, that loxatl mercenaries are active under
Slaith’s command at Ouranberg. Tac reports and battlefield intelligence have
shown that these alien scum are particularly resistant to las-fire.”
Gaunt lifted a bulky weapon from the crate. It was an autorifle, almost a
small cannon, with a heavy gauge barrel and a folding skeleton stock. He
slapped a fat drum magazine into the slot behind the gnurled metal of the
foregrip.
“This is a U90 assault cannon. Old, but powerful. Fires .45 calibre solid
rounds at semi and full auto. Kicks like a bastard. The drum-pattern clip
holds forty rounds. I’ve borrowed these four from the Urdeshi. They’re
manufactured on their home world. Not a terribly good weapon and prone to
fouling, but with plenty of stopping power and the best trade-off of power
against weight we could manage. Each team should assign one member to
carry one in place of his or her standard las. The drums marked with a
yellow cross carry standard shells.” He took another out of the crate and held
it up. “The ones with the red cross are drummed with explosive AP shells.
We think these old solid-slug chuckers, firing armour piercing, will be your
best chance against the loxad. Designated troopers should get practice with
them as soon as possible.”
Gaunt put the weapon and the spare drum back in the crate.
“I’ll be back to continue briefing tomorrow. We’ll deal with DZ specifics
then, and begin a survey of the target landscape. Until then… keep up the
good work.”
“Oh feth,” Larkin said, “this keeps getting better and better.”
For three days, supply barges from Hessenville had been arriving to dock in
the hangars along Cirenholm’s skirts. Those that arrived under escort on the
morning of the 221st were accompanied by the drogue Skyro, carrying two
Urdeshi and one Krassian regiment to bolster the invasion forces.
Many of the barges had been lugging aerial ordnance and parts to
strengthen the taskforce’s air wing, along with some eighteen Marauders and
twenty-seven Lightnings. Since the afternoon of the 215th, the strike wings
had been flying sorties north of Cirenholm to wrest air superiority from the
Ouranberg squadrons, and now long-range night raids had begun on the city
itself. Admiral Ornoff’s intention was to soften the city’s defences and
neutralise as much of the enemy’s air power as possible prior to the main
assault, “O-Day” as it was called.
The effect of the bombing raids was difficult to judge. In three nights of
missions over three hundred thousand tonnes of explosives were dropped on
Ouranberg at a cost of four Marauders.
The fighter sorties were somewhat easier to evaluate. Unless scrambled to
meet a detected raid, which were few and far between, the Lightnings went
up in four-ship patrols, hunting enemy traffic as directed by Sky Command
Cirenholm’s modar, astrotachographic and long range auspex arrays. Twentynine
enemy planes of varying types were claimed as kills during the first five
days, for a loss of two Lightnings. On the afternoon of the 220th, four wings
of Phantine Lightnings were rushed up to intercept a mass raid by fifty enemy
dive bombers and escort fighters. Eight more Lightnings and six Marauders
were fast-tracked up to join them as the battle commenced. The northern
perimeter guns of Cirenholm blistered the cloud cover with flak.
The engagement lasted forty-eight minutes and was punishingly hardfought.
The enemy was utterly routed before they could land a single item of
munitions on Cirenholm. They lost a confirmed tally of thirty-three planes.
The Phantine lost six, including the decorated ace Erwell Costary. Flight
Lieutenant Larice Asch personally shot down four enemy aircraft, raising her
career score to make her one of the few female Phantine aces, and Pilot
Officer Febos Nicarde succeeded in notching up seven kills. Ornoff awarded
him the Silver Aquila. It took hours for the twisted contrails and exhaust
plumes created by the vast air battle to dissipate.
Inside the Cirenholm hangars, Munitorium workers, Imperial Guardsmen
and volunteer citizens alike toiled in shifts to unload, process and store the
vast influx of material. Some of the Hessenville barges also brought food and
medicae supplies for the wounded population.
Mid-afternoon on the 221st, just about the time Caffran was being
discharged, five platoons of Ghosts under the supervision of the Munitorium
were off-loading crates from a barge’s cargo hold and wheeling them on
trolleys through to a sub-hangar.
Rawne had put his adjutant Feygor in charge, partly to ensure that the
Ghosts got the pick of the inventory for their support weapons and rocket
launchers. The air was a racket of clattering carts, raised voices, whirring
hoists and rattling machine tools. The Ghosts were stripped to their vests,
sweating hard to heft the laden trolleys up through the arch of the sub-hangar
and then riding them back down the ramp empty with whoops and laughs. The
sub-hangar was beginning to look like a mad warlord’s pipe dream. Across
the wide floor, rows of ammo crates and munition pods alternated with rows
of carefully lined-up rockets. Along one wall, rack-carts with thick, meaty
tyres carried fresh-painted bombs and missiles destined for underwing
mounting. Some of the men had not been able to resist the temptation of
chalking their names on the warheads, or writing such taunts as “One from
the Ghosts” or “Goodbye fethhead” or “If you can read this, scream”. Others
had drawn on fanged mouths, turning the missiles into snarling predators.
Others, touchingly, had dedicated the bombs as gifts to the enemy from fallen
comrades.
“Running out of floor space,” Brostin told Feygor, mopping the
perspiration from his brow.
Feygor nodded. “Don’t break your rhythm. I’ll see to it.” He went in
search of a Munitorium official, who agreed to open up the next sub-hangar
along.
Feygor took Brostin with him to open up the sliding metal partition into the
next sub-space. They passed Troopers Polio and Derin wheeling a cart of
grenade boxes out into the back corridor.
“Where the feth are you going with that?” Feygor asked.
“The hall,” Polio replied as if it was a daft question. “We’re getting too
full in here…”
Feygor looked out into the gloomy access hall behind the hangar. Already,
work crews had lined up nine carts of munitions along one wall.
“Oh, feth… this isn’t right,” Feygor growled. “Take them back inside. All
of them.”
The two men groaned.
“Rusde up some others to help you. We’re going through into that subhangar
there,” Feygor said, pointing. “I have no idea why you thought this
was a good place to dump stuff.”
“We were just following the others,” Derin said.
“What?”
“The guys ahead of us. There was a Munitorium fether with them, and they
seemed to know what they were doing.”
“Go and get that guy over there,” snapped Feygor, indicating the
Munitorium chief he’d spoken to. Derin hurried off.
Fifty metres down the back corridor from them, another hatch opened off
the sub-hangar. As Feygor waited for the clerk to arrive, he saw three Ghosts
wheeling another cart through, accompanied by a Munitorium aide.
“Ah, feth…” Feygor said. He was about to shout out when Polio said,
“They must be hot.”
There was something about Polio’s tone that made Feygor look again. The
three Ghosts were wearing full kit, including tunics and wool hats.
“With me,” Feygor said to Brostin and Polio, and moved forward at a jog.
“Hey, hey you there!”
The Ghosts seemed to ignore him. They were intent on getting their cart of
missiles into a service elevator.
“Hey!”
Two of them turned. Feygor didn’t recognise either of them. And Feygor
prided himself on knowing every face in the regiment.
“What the feth…?” he began.
One of the “Ghosts” suddenly pulled a laspistol and fired on them.
Feygor cried out and pulled Brostin into the wall as the shots blistered
past them.
Polio had been a nobleman’s bodyguard back on Verghast, a trained
warrior of House Anko. Expensive neural implants, paid for by his lord,
gave him a reaction time significantly shorter than that of unaugmented
humans. With a graceful sweep that combined instinct and immaculate
training, he drew an autopistol from his thigh pocket and returned fire,
placing his body without thinking between the assailants and his comrades.
He dropped the shooter with a headshot. The others fled.
“After the bastards!” Feygor bellowed. He was on his feet, his laspistol
ripped from its holster. Brostin had wrenched a fire-axe from a wall bracket.
The interlopers pounded away down a side hall and into a stairwell. As he
ran, Feygor keyed his headset. “Alert! Security alert! Hangar 45! Intruders
heading down-block to level thirty!” The sub-hangar behind them erupted in
commotion.
They burst into the stairwell and heard feet clattering on the steps below.
Feygor took the stairs three at a time, with Polio close on his heels and
Brostin lumbering after.
Feygor threw himself against the banister and fired down the airspace.
Two hard-round shots ricocheted back up at him. They heard a door crash
open.
The lower door led into a service area, a wide machine shop that seemed
menacingly quiet and dark, and which glistened with oil. Feygor charged
through the door and was almost killed by the gunman who had ducked back
to lie in wait behind the hatch. Two bullets hissed past the back of his head
and made him stumble. A moment later, Brostin came out of the door and
pinned the gunman to the wall with one splintered whack of the fire-axe.
Shots rattled back across the machine shop. Feygor spotted one muzzle
flash in the semi-gloom, dropped on one knee and fired his laspistol from a
double-handed brace. The target lurched back against a workbench and fell
on his face.
There was no sign of the third one. Polio and Feygor prowled forward.
Both swung around as they heard a door squeak. For a moment a figure was
framed against the light outside. Polio’s handgun roared and the figure flew
out of sight as if yanked by a rope.
Brostin found the machine shop lights.
Polio checked that the man he’d hit at the door was dead, and returned to
find Feygor rolling his kill over on the oily floor. There was no mistaking the
man’s grizzled face, or his hands, thick with old scars. The Ghost uniform
didn’t even fit him particularly well. But it was a Ghost uniform. Right down
to the straight silver warknife in his belt case.
“Feth!” said Feygor.
“Look at that,” said Polio. He knelt down. Near to the bloody hole Feygor
had put through the corpse, the black Tanith tunic had another rent, a scorched
puncture that had been hastily sewn up with back thread.
“This isn’t the first time this tunic’s been worn by a dead man,” he said.
SIX
Half-decent food was an understandable rarity on Cirenholm, but the late
lunch placed in front of Gaunt and Zweil looked surprisingly inviting.
“You’ve excelled yourself, Beltayn,” Gaunt told his adjutant.
“It’s not much, sir,” said Beltayn, though he was obviously pleased by the
compliment. “If an adj-officer can’t rustle up some proper meat and a little
fresh bread for his chief, what good is he?”
“Well, I hope you saved some for yourself too,” said Gaunt, tucking in.
Beltayn blushed.
“If an adj-officer can’t fill his own stomach, what good is he to his chief?”
Gaunt reassured him.
“Yes sir.” Beltayn paused, and then produced a bottle of claret. “Don’t ask
where I got this,” he said.
“My dear Beltayn,” said Zweil, pouring himself a glass. “This act alone
will get you into heaven.”
Beltayn smiled, saluted and left.
Zweil offered the bottle to Gaunt, who shook his head. They were sitting at
a table in the stateroom of the merchant’s house Gaunt had co-opted for his
officers. It was a little cold and damp, but well appointed. Zweil smacked
his lips and ate with gusto.
“You’re pleased about Caffran?” he said.
“A weight off my mind, father. He says to thank you for the spiritual
support you’ve offered.”
“Least I could do.”
“You’ll be busy the next few days,” Gaunt said. “The invasion hour
approaches, and men will be looking for blessing and counsel.”
“They’ve already started coming. Every time I go to the chapel, there are
Ghosts waiting for me.”
“What’s the feeling?”
“Good, good… confident The men are ready, if that’s what you want to
hear.”
“I want to hear the truth, father.”
“You know the mood. How’s Operation Larisel shaping up?” Gaunt put
down his cutlery. “You’re not meant to know about that.”
“Oh, I know. No one is. But in the last two days Varl, Kuren, Meryn, Milo,
Cocoer and Nour have all come to say penance and receive benediction. I
couldn’t really not know.”
“It’ll be fine. I have every confidence.”
There was a knock at the door and Daur came in. He looked excited.
“Captain. Pull up a chair and pour yourself a drink. I can call Beltayn
back, if you’re hungry.”
“I’ve eaten,” said Daur, sitting with them. “Then report.”
“A little disturbance on the hangar decks earlier. Feygor rumbled some
interlopers trying to steal munitions.”
“Indeed?”
“They were Blood Pact, sir.”
Gaunt pushed away his plate and looked at the Verghast officer.
“Seriously?”
Daur nodded. “Three of them dressed as Ghosts and another disguised as a
Munitorium clerk. They’re all dead. A bit of a firefight, I hear.”
“Feth! We should—”
Daur raised a hand. “Already done, sir. We scoured the vicinity with
fireteams and smoked out a cell of them hiding in the basement levels. They
must have been there since the liberation, lying low. They didn’t go without a
fight. We found they had sneaked about three tonnes of explosive munitions
down there. Probably intended to cause merry hell when they were up to
strength.”
Gaunt sat back. “Have you alerted the other commanders?”
Daur nodded. “We’re coordinating a fresh sweep of the entire city to check
for any others that may have slipped the net the first time. No traces yet, so
we may be clean. It may have been an isolated group. We have, however,
already identified six locals who were assisting them.”
“By the throne!”
“I think the Blood Pact had threatened them, but they’d also paid them well
for their troubles. In defaced gold coins.”
Gaunt pushed his unfinished meal aside. “This has all been handed on to
Del Mar?”
“I believe the interrogations and executions are already underway.”
“Extraordinary…” Zweil mused. “We free them from these monsters, and
still the taint persists.”
“Sir,” said Daur, choosing his words carefully, “the Blood Part were using
disguises. Stolen clothes and equipment. They had obtained at least nine full
sets of Tanith uniform.”
“Where from?”
“The morgue, sir. When we checked, nine bodybags had been opened and
the corpses stripped.”
“The fething heathens…”
“Sir, they had everything. Ghost fatigues, webbing, even warknives.”
Gaunt realised where this was heading. The realisation stunned him. He
looked at Daur.
“You’re talking about Cuu, aren’t you?”
Daur sighed. “Yes sir, I am. A man dressed in Tanith uniform, wielding a
warknife, carrying defaced coin. It’s no longer so simple.”
“Oh feth,” Gaunt murmured and poured himself a glass of wine. “It is.
Cuu’s a stone killer. We’ve got him.”
“With respect,” said Daur. “Maybe we haven’t. I don’t like Cuu, but he
maintains that all he is guilty of is looting the coins. What if he’s innocent?
There’s now a reasonable doubt.”
“Yes, but—”
“Colonel-commissar, you went to the wire for Caffran on the basis of
reasonable doubt. Doesn’t Cuu deserve that kind of loyalty too? He’s a Ghost
just like Caffran.”
“But—”
“But what? He’s a Verghastite? Is that it?” Daur rose angrily. “Sit down,
Daur! That’s not what I meant”
“Really? Tell that to all the Verghastites in this regiment tomorrow when
Cuu goes to the wall.” He marched out and slammed the door. “What?” Gaunt
growled at Zweil.
The old father shrugged. “Man’s got a point. Cuu’s a Ghost. He should
expect the great and honourable Ibram Gaunt to fight his corner just as much
as he did for Caffran.”
“Cuu’s a killer,” Gaunt echoed.
“Maybe. If you’re expecting me to confirm or deny that on the basis of
confession, forget it. I am a sponge for secrets, for the good of men’s souls,
but I do not leak. Otherwise men would not trust me. Only the God-Emperor
hears what I hear.”
“The Emperor protects,” said Gaunt.
“Are you biased?” Zweil asked impertinently.
“What?”
“Biased? Towards the Tanith? It’s often thought you are. You favour the
Tanith over the Verghastites.”
“I do not!”
Zweil shrugged. “It’s just the way it seems sometimes. To the Vervunhivers
especially. You value them, appreciate them, even like some of them, men
like Daur. But you always look to the Tanith first.”
“They’ve been with me longer.”
“No excuse. Are the Verghastite second-class members of this regiment?”
“No!” Gaunt slammed down his glass and got up. “No, they are not.”
“Then stop making it seem as if they are. Quickly, before the Tanith First
comes apart at the seams and splits down the middle.”
Gaunt was silent. He gazed out of the window.
“How many times in the last week have you mentioned Corbec in your
addresses to the men? Keeping them updated on his progress? And how many
times have you mentioned Soric? Two chief officers, both beloved of the
men, both ostensibly valued by you… both dying. But Corbec is in every
rousing speech you make. Soric? Forgive me, Ibram, but I can’t remember the
last time you even mentioned him.”
Gaunt turned round slowly. “I refuse to accept that I’m as biased as you
say. I have done everything to induct the Verghastites properly and fairly. I
damn well know there is rivalry… I—”
“What Ibram?”
“If you can even think this is true… and if Daur thinks it too, as he most
obviously does, I will do what I have to. I will show the regiment that there
is no division. I will demonstrate it so there is no doubt. I will not have
anyone believing that I somehow favour the Tanith. The Ghosts are the
Ghosts. Always and forever, first and only. It doesn’t matter where they come
from.”
Zweil toasted Gaunt and drained his glass. “I take it you know how to do
that?”
“Yes, though it goes against my ethical judgment and sticks in my throat, I
do. I have to fight for Cuu’s life.”
They notched up twenty kilometres doing circuits of the secondary dome’s
promenade and then picked up the pace and took the thirty flight central dome
stairwell at a sprint.
By the time Kolea’s section arrived back in the withered park ground set
aside for exercise, they were panting and drenched with sweat.
“Fall out,” Kolea said, his own breaths coming in gasps. He leaned over
against his knees so that his dog-tags swung from his neck, and spat on the
ground.
The men flopped down in the dust or shambled off to find water. Across
the grey, dead grass, Skerral and Ewler’s sections were doing callisthenics,
directed by Sergeant Skerral’s booming voice.
Hwlan tossed Kolea a water bottle and the sergeant nodded his thanks
before taking a big gulp.
The section felt light, and he didn’t like it. There had been a few casualties
during the assault, but Rawne had promised to rotate some men up from
lower platoons to make up the balance.
What Kolea particularly noticed was the gaping hole left by the three who
had disappeared since their arrival on Phantine. Nessa and Nour, sidelined
for special ops by Gaunt. And Cuu.
Kolea didn’t know what to think about that.
“We should maybe visit Cuu tonight, if we get the passes,” Lubba said as if
somehow tuned to Kolea’s thoughts. It was likely the subject was on every
mind in the section.
“What do you mean?” Kolea said.
“Go see him. Wish him well. That’d be okay, wouldn’t it, sarge?”
“Yeah, of course.”
Lubba, the squad’s flamer operator, was a short, thick-set man covered in
underhive tattoos. He leaned back against the fence. “Well, we won’t be
seeing the poor gak again, will we?”
“What?”
“He’ll be dead by this time tomorrow. Against the wall,” Jajjo said.
“Only if he’s guilty—” Kolea began. “I can’t believe Cuu, even Cuu,
would do a thing like that.”
“Doesn’t matter though, does it?” said Lubba sitting up again. “Old Gaunt
put his balls on the block to get Caff released. He won’t bother this time.
Fact is, I reckon Cuu was the trade-off. Cuu in exchange for Caff.”
Kolea shook his head. “Gaunt wouldn’t do that—” Several Verghastites
laughed. “He wouldn’t!”
“Caff’s Tanith, ain’t he? Much more valuable.” Kolea got up. “It doesn’t
work like that, Lubba. We’re all Ghosts.”
“Yeah, right.” Lubba sat back and closed his eyes.
There was a stillness for a moment, broken only by Skerral’s distant yells.
For the first time, Kolea felt the mood. The feeling that gnawed at the
Verghastites. The feeling they were second-class. He’d never sensed it
before. He’d always got nothing but respect from Gaunt. But now…
“Come on!” he said, clapping his hands. “Up and into the shower block!
Go! Mess-call’s in twenty minutes!”
There were moans and the men got despondently onto their feet. Kolea
trailed them back towards the park hatch.
Ana Curth, dressed in old combat fatigues, was sitting on a rickety bench
at the end of the path near the hatch. She was leaning back with her legs
stretched out and crossed, reading a dog-eared old text.
“Good book?” Kolea asked, pausing by her.
She looked up. “Gregorus of Okassis. The Odes. One of Dorden’s
recommendations. Either I’m very stupid or I’m just not getting it.”
“So,” Kolea said, turning to watch the men on the far side of the park
doing star jumps. “This is just a little down-time between shifts?”
“Yeah. I like the fresh air.” He looked round and saw the ironic smirk on
her face. “Actually. I was waiting for you. Obel said you’d be bringing your
section back this way at the end of training.”
“Me?” Kolea said.
“You.”
“Why?”
“Because I felt like meddling where I wasn’t wanted. Got a minute?” He
sat on the bench next to her.
“Remember what we talked about back at Bhavnager? You confided in
me.”
“I did. Who have you told?”
She slapped him playfully on the arm with her text. “No one. But that’s the
point. You should.”
“Not this again.”
“Just answer me this, sergeant. Are you trying to get yourself killed?”
Kolea opened his mouth to reply and paused. He was taken aback. “Of
course I’m not. Unless you count enlistment in the Imperial Guard as a death
wish.”
She shrugged. “People are worried about you.”
“People?”
“Some people.”
“Which people?”
Curth smiled. He liked her smile. “Come on, Gol,” she said. “I’m not
about to—”
“I let you into my confidence. Seems only fair you trust me as far.”
She put the text down and stretched her arms. “Got me. Okay. Fair enough.
One of the people would be Varl.”
“I ought to—”
“Not say anything to him,” she cut in, flippantly. “Confidences,
remember?”
“All right,” he growled.
“Varl… amongst others, I think… believes you’re taking unnecessary
risks. They think it’s because you’ve lost your wife and kids, and that you’re
looking for a… what was it? A reuniting round.”
“Reunion round.”
“Uh-huh. That’s it. That’s what they think, anyway. But I know better, don’t
I?”
“So?” He picked up her text and began thumbing through the pages. Poems.
Long, old poems like the kind he’d struggled through in Elementary Grade
twenty-five years before.
“Well, are they right to be worried?”
“No.” He glanced at her quickly, and saw she was gazing at him intently.
“No. I’m not… not taking risks. I don’t think I am. Not deliberately.”
“But?”
Kolea chewed his lip for a second. He looked down at the book with a
little shake of the head. There was a moment. During the assault. I ran into the
gunfire. I… I didn’t care.
“Varl saw me. Even now, I can’t imagine what I was thinking.”
“That you want to escape?”
He turned his head and met her eyes. There was no guile in them. Only
care. The care that made her a great healer. “What do you mean?”
“We all want escape. Escape from poverty, fear, death, pain. Escape from
whatever we hate about life. And we all have our ways. The Ghosts who
drink to drown the terrors of war. The ones who gamble. The ones who have
a superstition for every thing they do.” As she was speaking, she slid a
packet of lho-sticks out of her jacket pocket and lit one. “Me, it’s bad old
poetry, a park bench in pretend sunlight, and these damn things.” She took a
drag. She’d given up years before after her promotion to surgeon. The old
habit had crept up on her again those last few months. “And I like a glass of
sacra now and then. Feth, I escape in all sorts of ways, don’t I?”
He laughed, partly at her frank remark and partly at the way her Verghastite
accent made the Tanith curse sound. She was one of the few from Vervunhive
who had cheerfully borrowed that other world’s oath.
“You, though,” she went on. “Well, there’s no escape, is there? Drink,
narcotics… they must only make it worse. The hell of having your kids so
near and yet so far away. For you, it must seem like there’s only one escape.
An escape from life itself.”
“You’re a psychiatrist now, then?”
She blew a raspberry. “There is another way, you know. Another escape.”
“I know.”
“Do you?”
“Yeah. I tell them. I tell Caff and Tona. I reveal myself to the kids. Don’t
think I haven’t thought about it. Ana, it would hurt them all. Caffran and
Criid… it would destroy them. It’d be like taking their children away. And
Dalin and Yoncy. Gak, the trauma. They’ve survived losing me. Finding me
again might be too much.”
“I think they’d survive. All of them. I think they’d benefit in many ways. I
think it would matter to them. More than you know.”
He flicked the pages of the text. “Maybe.”
“Not to mention the good it will do you. Will you think about it?”
“What if I don’t?”
“Oooh… you’ve no idea how persistent I can be. Or how many
unnecessary medical checks I can order for you.”
“I’ll make you a deal,” said Kolea. “The assault on Ouranberg is close.
Real close. Let me get through that. Then I’ll… I’ll come clean. If you think
it’s for the best.”
“I do. I really do.”
“But not before Ouranberg. Caffran and Criid will need their heads
together for that. I’ll not drop a bombshell like this just before a big show.”
Curth nodded and exhaled a plume of smoke. It shone blue in the artificial
light as it billowed away. “Fair enough.”
Kolea fidgeted with the book again, flipping the pages one last time before
handing it back.
He stopped. The text had fallen open on the tide page. A yellowing
certificate had been pasted onto the endpaper. It was a scholam prize,
awarding Mikal Dorden a merit in elementary comprehension.
“Dorden lent you this text?”
“Yes,” she said, leaning over. “Oh. I hadn’t noticed that. It must have been
his son’s.”
For the first few years of the regiment’s life, Mikal and Tolin Dorden had
been unique amongst the Ghosts. Father and son. Doc Dorden and his trooper
boy. The only blood relationship to survive the fall of Tanith.
Mikal had died in the battle for Vervunhive.
Kolea gave her back the ragged old book.
“Gol?”
“Yeah?”
“Don’t leave it too long. Don’t leave it until it’s too late.”
“I promise you I won’t,” he said.
SEVEN
At 08.00 Imperial on the morning of the 222nd, the Ghosts assigned to
Operation Larisel met in an office annexe off the training sub-hangar. They
had exercised, showered and eaten a good breakfast brought in from the
billet kitchens. There was a tension in the air, but it was a fine-tuned, taut
feeling of readiness and an eagerness to get on and do.
The annexe had been cleared so as to accommodate a tactical desk, and
folding chairs had been arranged in a circle around it.
“Take your seats,” Kersherin told them as they filed in. When Captain
Daur arrived, everyone was surprised to see him.
He walked in casually and took off his cap and jacket. “Morning,” he said.
“Where’s the colonel-commissar?” asked Mkoll.
“He’s asked me to convey his apologies and take his place. Something
came up.”
Daur walked over to the tac-desk and loaded a data-spool into the slot The
unit hummed and information scrolled across its glass screens. Daur typed in
the password that would let him access the confidential files.
“What something?” Adare called out Daur ignored him.
“Let’s talk about Ouranberg,” he said, getting their attention. The Phantine
troopers took their seats amongst the Ghosts.
Daur keyed a stud on the desk and a large hololithic image of the target
city rose majestically into being above the optical emitters. A threedimensional
landscape, covering the table top.
“There it is,” he said.
They all craned forward.
“Stand up, if you want to. You need to get to know this place. Let’s begin
with basics. Two linked domes, Alpha and Beta, primary habitation. Built
against and between them to the north is the main vapour mill complex. Here,
you see? Adjoining that and Beta dome is Gamma, a smaller habitat sector.
Minor habitat domes cluster around the north edges of the mill. The main
aerodrome is here, in the cleavage between Gamma and Beta, if we want to
think in anatomical terms.”
“Hey, let’s not,” said Banda. Several men laughed. Daur held up an
apologetic hand. “Fine. Here… you see? Here at the southern face, the main
porta is—”
“What’s a porta?” asked Larkin.
“Gateway, Larks.”
“Just so’s I know,” Larkin said, making careful notes in his jotter.
“The main porta, anyway. A sixty metre square vacuum hatch called
Ourangate. In front of it, extending out on an apron of rock for about a
kilometre, give or take, is Pavia Fields, a kind of ornamental platform.”
What are those? Nessa signed.
“Standing stones. Monolithic war memorials,” said Daur, catching her
gestures easily and answering at once. “It’s called the Avenue of the
Polyandrons and it marks the formal approach to Ourangate. Linked to the
Pavia Fields platform by a causeway is the Imperial Phantine Landing
Station, the main dock point for drogues. Especially if they’re carrying
Imperial nobility. Extending on another causeway from the north-east of the
city is the secondary vapour mill complex, built on a neighbouring peak. The
mountain top Ouranberg is constructed on actually rises up through the city,
hence this… Ouranpeak.”
Daur indicated the fang of rock that jutted out of the top of the city model,
between the Beta and Gamma domes.
“What are those extensions to the west and north?” Mkvenner asked.
“Stacks,” Daur said. “Linked by supported pipelines to the main mill.
They use them to flare off waste gases.”
He looked round the room. “Okay so far? Let’s talk about drop zones. Any
questions up to this point?”
“Yeah,” said Varl. “What did you say Gaunt was doing again?”
“You’ve started?” Gaunt said.
“Yes we have,” Commissar Del Mar said wearily. “Time is precious, so
we moved the sessions up by half an hour.”
“I wasn’t notified.”
“Gaunt, I understood you weren’t bringing a challenge to this hearing.”
“I changed my mind,” said Gaunt. He stepped up onto the platform and
walked to the empty row of seats on the defence side.
Cuu, hunched, shackled and defeated, stood where Caffran had been the
morning before.
“Approach the bench,” said Del Mar. Gaunt walked over to him and lent
down on the table.
“I just about tolerated your showboating with Caffran yesterday. Gaunt,”
whispered Del Mar. “I can’t believe you’ve got the brass neck to turn up
again today. This is the devil you put in the frame for the killing. It’s a done
thing. You said yourself he was the one.”
“I may have been wrong. A moment, please.”
Before Del Mar could protest, Gaunt walked back down the stage and
faced Cuu.
“Did you do it?” he said simply.
“No, sir!” There was animal fear in Cuu’s ugly, piercing eyes. “I looted
gold, enemy gold, for that I’ll put my hand up. But I didn’t do no killing. Sure
as sure.”
Gaunt hesitated. Then he walked back to Del Mar, took a pack off his
shoulder, and emptied the contents onto the desk in front of the commissar.
Ghost daggers, nine of them, each one wrapped in plastene.
“What is this?” asked Del Mar.
“Warknives. Straight silver, Tanith issue. Some are notched, as you can
see. Any one of them might be the murder weapon.”
“And why should I believe that?”
“Because these were recovered from a Blood Pact cell operating in the
undercity. They had acquired several sets of Tanith fatigues and these knives.
They were using defaced coinage to bribe the locals. The evidence I sent you
— the blade shard, the coin under the bath — it all points to Cuu there.
Unless you take into account the notion that not everyone dressed as a Ghost
that night was a Ghost.”
“You’re truly pissing me off now, Gaunt,” said Del Mar. “I won’t stand for
this.”
“I don’t care. All I care about is my duty. There are reasonable grounds for
the dismissal of charges against Trooper Cuu. As reasonable as the grounds
you threw Caffran’s case out on.”
“I’m warning you—”
“Don’t even try. You know I’m right.”
Del Mar sat back, shaking his head. “What about the old man? The
witness?”
“I showed him a picture of Cuu and he didn’t recognise him either.”
“I see. So the Ghost who was seen, the one who undoubtedly slew Onti
Flyte…”
“…was very likely a Blood Pact trooper masquerading as a Ghost, yes.”
Del Mar sighed.
“Reasonable doubt,” said Gaunt.
“Damn you, Gaunt.”
“Sir, can we square this away so that I can get on with my real duties?”
Gaunt said, sarcastically stressing the word “real”.
“He admits looting?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Then he’ll be flogged. Case dismissed.”
Gaunt didn’t stay to see the sentence carried out. As he came down the steps
of the Chamber of Justice, he met Hark hurrying in. The man looked tired, his
eyes still puffy with sleep, and he was trying to smooth down his hair with
his fingers.
Hark stopped in his tracks when he saw Gaunt “Sir?”
“It’s done. Cuu has been cleared of the murder.” Hark fell into step with
him as they descended into the yard.
“I… I wish you had kept me informed, sir.”
“Informed, Viktor?”
“That you’d changed your mind about Cuu’s guilt.” Gaunt glanced at him.
“It was an eleventh hour decision. I thought you’d be pleased. Between the
pair of you, you and ayatani Zweil have been on at me for days about being
even-handed towards the Verghastites. And you were right. A popular Ghost
gets into trouble, and I move heaven and earth to get him out of the mess. A
less-popular Verghastite gets in trouble, and I cut him adrift. I dread to think
what it would have done to Verghastite morale if I’d left Cuu to face the court
alone this morning.”
“I am pleased, sir. For inevitable reasons, you do seem to have favoured
the Tanith until now. Even if you didn’t think that’s what you were doing.”
“Captain Daur brought me up sharp, I’m glad to say.” He stopped walking
and turned to Hark. “You still seem… put out Viktor.”
“Like I said, I wish you’d told me you had decided to go to bat for Cuu. I
could have helped.”
“I managed fine.”
“Of course. But I could have done some leg work, organised evidence.
That’s what I’m here for.”
Gaunt raised a hand and the staff driver assigned to him started up the
waiting car and drove it across the yard to collect him.
“I suppose you could have talked to witnesses. You probably would have
preferred to do that yourself, rather than let me do it.”
“Sir?”
“I went to visit Mr. Absolom, Hark. He’d seen the killer, after all. I had to
make sure he didn’t recognise Cuu. Mr. Absolom’s a fine old fellow. A
service veteran, isn’t he? He’d do anything for the Imperial Guard.
Especially if a persuasive commissar came to see him and convinced him it
was his duty.”
Hark’s eyes darkened. “You told me to guarantee Caffran’s acquittal.”
“And a key witness would do that wouldn’t it? Absolom didn’t recognise
Cuu’s picture, of course. But you knew that. He wouldn’t recognise any
picture. Because he didn’t see the killer at all, did he, Viktor?”
Hark looked away. “I suppose you’ll want my resignation from the
regiment?” he said bitterly.
“No. But I want you to learn from this. I will not break Imperial law.
Better that Caffran had gone to execution innocent than lie to get him off.
Commissars are often thought of as devious, Viktor. That reputation is
justified. They are political animals who use all the tricks of politics to
achieve their goals. That is not my way. And I will never sanction it in any
man in my command. You could make an exemplary officer, Hark. My oh-so
naive idea of an exemplary officer, anyway. Don’t stoop to those methods
again, or I will drum you out of this company and the Commissariate. Do we
have an understanding?”
Hark nodded. Gaunt got into his car and was driven away out through the
gate. Hark watched him go. “Naive. You said it.”
Gaunt stepped up onto an empty ammo crate that Beltayn had lugged in. He
raised his voice, and the sound of it silenced the men gathered round in the
main billet.
“Men of Tanith, men of Verghast. Ghosts. The word has just been given.
Weather permitting, we go for Ouranberg at dawn on the 226th. Make ready
for the Emperor’s work. That is all.”
As he got off the box and put his cap back on, Gaunt thought about the
information he hadn’t been at liberty to announce. By the time the invasion
began, the squads of Operation Larisel would have been active in Ouranberg
for over twenty-four hours.
God-Emperor willing.
THE DROP
OURANBERG, PHANTINE, 224.771, M41
“Never, ever, ever fething again!”
—Trooper Larkin, 2nd Team marksman, Tanith First
Just after midnight, in the first hour of the 224th, Scald-storms rose
cyclonically in the cloud oceans north of Cirenholm. Jarring, superheated
belts of fire, dozens of kilometres long, crackled up into the higher reaches of
the sky, and the borealis flickered and roiled in queasy, phantom coils.
Air visibility and sensor ranges were cut to less than five kilometres.
Plumes of rising ash blotted out the stars. The poisonous heart of Phantine
raged against the night.
The storms had been predicted by the Navy’s long-range auspex, and the
twitching senses of the taskforce astropaths. This was what the tacticians had
been waiting for.
The drogues Zephyr and Trenchant had reached their holding position
several hours before midnight. Hugging a dense reef of altocumulus cloud
forty kilometres across, they kept station in a shallow gulf of sky called the
Leaward Races, almost in the dead centre of the great air desert known as the
Western Continental Reaches.
On the flight deck of the Zephyr, Admiral Ornoff ordered the launch.
Ornoff had used the drogues judiciously to pursue his policy of nightly
raids. By releasing the bomber shoals from carriers that varied their
positions, he ensured that the defences of Ouranberg never knew from which
direction to expect the next raid. Enemy hunter squadrons searched for the
drogues by day, hoping to surprise them before they could unleash their
armadas, but the Western Continental Reaches were vast, and Ornoff used the
mammatocumulus of the regular Scald-storms as cover.
The night raid of the 224th would approach Ouranberg from the south-east
covering a distance to the target of about three hundred and forty kilometres.
They would use the prevailing jet streams of the Reaches to maximise speed,
hugging the ultra-violet void where the troposphere became the stratosphere.
Including the fighter escort of Imperial Navy Lightnings and Thunderbolts,
the raiding force numbered some six hundred aircraft. Thirty matt-grey
Marauders of the Phantine Air Corps took the role of the pathfinders,
pressing ahead clear of the main formation to light up the target with
illumination-mines and incendiary payloads. Six minutes behind them came a
mass wave of over three hundred heavy bombers. Most of these were
lumbering, six-engined Magogs, painted an unreflective black. The Magog
was a prop-driven, atmospheric type that had been in service for centuries,
but the wave also included two dozen Behemoths, the awesome and ancient
giants of Phantine Bomber Command.
Following the first wave came a second pack of Marauders, from either
Imperial Navy or Urdeshi regimental squadrons. The green mottle-camo of
the former distinguished them from the silver-belly/beige-top two-tone of the
latter. All seventy of them were laden with fuel-air explosive payloads.
The third wave numbered almost two hundred craft. More Magogs, as
well as twenty Urdeshi Marauder Destroyers and thirty Phantine Shrikes.
These destroyers, and the elderly hook-winged, single-engined Shrike jets,
were specialist dive bombers that would finish the raid by carrying out
pinpoint low-level runs into a target zone that, by then, should have been
grievously punished.
Flying as part of the second wave were four void-blue Phantine
Marauders that carried no bombs at all. Larisel 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Kersherin and the other Skyborne specialists checked the Ghosts over one by
one, covering every detail down to boot laces and pocket studs with what
would have seemed like obsessive fuss had the tension not been so high.
Each member of the Larisel teams wore a modified version of their
standard Tanith uniform. In place of regulation underwear, they had been
issued silk-lined, rubberised body-gloves that acted both as insulation
against the extreme cold and a seal against the corrosive atmosphere. Over
that went the black Tanith tunic, breeches and webbing, and over that a zip-up
leather jump-smock that came down to the hips and was laced with chainmail.
Light equipment that would normally have been carried in a kit bag or
backpack was distributed into the uniform pockets of the tunic and the
webbing pouches and the smock closed up tightly over the top. Gloves and
boots were then pulled on, and gaiters buckled around the wrists and boottops
to form a tight seal.
By then, the Ghosts were already sweating in the hot and abnormally heavy
gear. They raised their arms as light belts-and-braces of outer webbing were
fitted. These had pouches at the hips for additional kit items, and secure
loops for lamp packs, flares, a rope-coil, a short-nose laspistol, a saw-edged
cutting knife and the Tanith blade. Their camo-cloaks were tightly wound
with a scrim-net around a pack of tube charges and grenades, and stuffed into
a musette bag that was lashed horizontally from the front of the outer webbing
across the groin. Medi-packs, bag-rations and power-cells for the lasrifles
and pistols were loaded into the troopers’ thigh pouches.
Not everyone was carrying a lasrifle. Apart from the four snipers with
their long-las variants earned in covers with slings, Milo, Cocoer, Meryn and
Varl had the U90 cannons. The solid ammunition took up a lot more space, so
while the four of them carried spare cells in their thigh pouches for the other
team members’ guns, every member of the squad was strung with a bandolier
of drum magazines. For the drop, the four U90’s had slim, twenty-five round
clips fitted and wrapped into place with adhesive tape. The higher capacity
drum-mags they all carried in their bandoliers were too bulky to jump with.
The cannons, like the lasrifles, had their muzzles plugged with wax stoppers
to prevent them fouling on impact.
Camo paint was applied to their faces, and micro-beads fitted into their
ears and tested. Then they pulled on their woollen hats and did up their
smock collars ready for the helmets. Varl kissed the silver aquila that hung on
a chain around his neck before dropping it down into his tunic and buckling
up the neck of the over-jacket.
The helmets were black steel with integral visors. Inside, they had a
leather liner-cap that buckled in place around the chin. A canvas frill around
the bottom of the helmet tucked inside the smock collar and sealed with a zip.
A pressurised air-bottle, which hooked to the chest webbing, would feed
oxygen into the helmet cavity during the jump.
Finally, the jump-packs were lifted onto their backs, strapped on, and the
power engaged for a final check. Main weapons were cinched right across
their chests. Safeties were double-checked. Kersherin offered up a brief but
heartfelt prayer for them all.
They could see little, and hear even less, except the crackle of the vox. It
was hard to walk under the weight, and they shuffled around, smacking hands
with each other awkwardly for good luck.
Once the four Phantine Skyborne were suited — an operation that took a
great deal less time —they were all escorted by ground crew across the
Trenchant’s number five flight deck to the four Marauders and man-handled
inside.
“Feth!” Milo heard Adare moan. “I’ve had enough already.”
The Marauders they were using for the drop had been stripped for the job,
with all bombs and weapons except the nose cannons removed. They
normally required a crew of six including gunners, but for this raid only two
flight crew, a pilot and a navigator, would take them up. The nose guns were
slaved to the pilot’s control, and the navigator would coordinate the drop
with the Skyborne officer aboard. The flight crew was already in position in
the cockpit above the cabin, completing final checks and blessings.
The squad members eased their overweight bulks down onto the bare
cabin floor.
The launch went smoothly. Ornoff took that to be a good sign. One Magog
turned back almost at once, reporting bombs hung, and another aborted after
about fifteen minutes, voxing in that it had suffered a critical instrument
failure. The first landed safely on the Zephyr’s runway deck. The other,
presumably blind, missed the drogues completely and flew on east into the
burning clouds. It was never seen again.
A raid launch with only two aborts. That was the best they’d managed
since they’d begun bombing Ouranberg. On the bridge of the Zephyr, Ornoff
felt a confidence rising within him. He summoned the drogue’s chief
ecclesiarch and ordered an impromptu service of deliverance.
The passage was noisier, colder and more turbulent than anything the Ghosts
had experienced riding the drops in over Cirenholm. They were much higher
and travelling much faster. Not long after the violent take-off, with cabin
temperature and pressure dropping away and skins of ice forming on the
metal surfaces inside the cabin, they all began to appreciate the sweltering
layers of clothing they were wearing.
There was a surprising amount to see, given that the cabin had limited
ports and they were trussed up in helmets and visors. What had been the
payload officer’s pict-plate had been switched on in each of the Marauders,
filling the darkness of each cabin with a chilly green glow, and displaying a
detailed modar picture of the raid formation.
In Larisel 1, Varl eased forward, struggling with the weight on his body.
He keyed his vox and gestured to the Phantine, Unterrio, who was tuning the
pict-plate.
“That’s the bomber waves?”
“Yeah,” answered Unterrio. Even using the vox, he had to raise his voice
above the engine noise and the constant thunder of the wind. “We’re here in
this belt.”
Varl looked closer, trying to focus through the visor’s eye-plates. He
realised each foggy band of modar returns was actually made up of hundreds
of individual dots, each one accompanied by a graphic number.
“Every craft has an identifying transponder,” Unterrio explained. “It helps
us pick up bandits quicker. Time was, enemy cloud-hunters would slip in
amongst the bomber shoals and bide their time, moving within the formation,
choosing their kills. Now, if you don’t display a code, you’re fair game.”
“Gotcha,” said Varl. It made sense. He looked round at the cabin and saw
that the other members of 1st Team — Banda, Vadim and Bonin — were
listening in and looking with interest.
“Which ones are the other jump-craft?” voxed Vadim.
Unterrio raised a gloved paw and pointed to spots on the plate. “That’s
Larisel 4, Sergeant Mkoll. That’s Sergeant Adare’s ship, Larisel 3. Here, just
hidden by the graphic of that Navy Marauder… that’s Larisel 2. Corporal
Meryn’s bird.”
It took a moment for Varl to make sense of the jumping, flickering display.
It seemed that the four jump-craft were spread out thinly amongst the bomber
wave.
The Marauder lurched, and the engines seemed to swoon and stutter.
“What was that?” Varl voxed, his voice sounding dry and hard over the
link.
“Turbulence,” replied Unterrio.
In Larisel 3, Specialist Cardinale was conducting a similar explanation of the
plate graphics for the benefit of Milo and Doyl. Nessa and Adare, perhaps
resigned to being mercilessly insulated against the world, were playing
blade, parchment, rock. Their giggles snickered over the vox-link as their
heavy-gloved hands beat out the repetitive gestures of the game.
Larkin wished there was a window to see out of, but there wasn’t. He sat on
the bare floor of Larisel 2’s cabin and gazed at the others. Kersherin was
studying the aiming-plate display. Kuren and Meryn were chatting. Mkvenner
looked like he was asleep.
“How long?” Larkin asked Kersherin. “Forty minutes,” replied the
Phantine.
Scour Sergeant Mkoll had not been designed to fly. But still he had not
challenged Gaunt’s decision to pick him for this operation. Mkoll didn’t do
things like that. And he knew that when the time came and he got onto the
target, he would be the right man for the job.
But the flying. That was a fething nightmare. He’d never been higher than
the top branches of a nalwood until Gaunt had taken the Tanith off-world.
Space travel — which, like Colm Corbec, he reviled — at least didn’t seem
like flying.
This was much worse. The vibration, the elemental wrath beating at the
craft. It was as if the air really didn’t want you to forget you were eight
kilometres up thanks only to its charitable physics.
And the waiting. That was the mind killer. Waiting for action. Waiting for
the moment. It allowed fears to grow. It gave a man time to worry about the
struggle ahead. Combat was hell, but at least it was against real enemies,
people you could actually shoot. The enemies here were time and fear,
imagination and turbulence… and cold.
Mkoll felt sick. He hated the waiting almost as much as he hated the
weight they were forced to wear. He felt anchored to the metal deck. When
the time came and the jump-call was given, he wasn’t entirely convinced he
would be able to get up.
He looked round Larisel 4’s cabin. Babbist, the Phantine trooper, was
fighting with the display plate. It kept rolling and flickering on him, showing
nothing but green fuzz. Bad tubes, Mkoll decided. If Babbist didn’t get it
working, they would be going in blind.
Cocoer and Nour were sitting back as if sleep. Nour probably was. He
switched off that way sometimes in the lag before combat. Twitchy and
already running on adrenalin, Rilke the team sniper was stripping and
reassembling the firing mechanism of his long-las, getting used to
manipulating it with his heavy gloves. Mkoll wanted to grab him and tell him
to stop, but he knew it was simply a coping strategy.
He keyed his vox and leant forward. “Okay, Rilke?”
“Sure, yeah,” crackled the sniper, his hands repeating the process over and
over again. “Actually, I’m fething scared, sarge. I keep wanting to throw up,
but I know I can’t in this visor.”
“That would be horrible,” Mkoll agreed. He heard Rilke laugh.
“I only do this to keep my mind off the nausea,” Rilke added, holding up
the trigger plate briefly before speedily fitting it again. “Feth, I feel sick. My
stomach is doing flips. How do you cope, sarge?”
“I watch you,” said Mkoll.
Thirty minutes from the target, an unidentified contact wavered on to the
screens and ten of the fighter escorts broke south to hunt it out.
“Probably just a heavy scald-flare,” Unterrio told the Ghosts. “We’re
fine.”
The Marauder lurched badly again, the fifth or sixth time it had done so
during the flight. The others didn’t seem to be noticing the jolts anymore, but
Bonin was convinced it wasn’t turbulence. The acute wariness that Mkoll
had trained into Bonin and all the Tanith scouts was ringing all sorts of
alarms in his head.
He got up, slowly, heavily, and thumped forward to the short rungs that led
up into the cockpit. Unterrio was hunched over the pict-plate with Varl and
he looked up as Bonin shuffled past, unhappy that he was moving around but
not about to stop him.
Bonin peered up at the flight crew. They seemed to be fighting with the
controls.
“Problem?” he voxed.
“No,” said the pilot. “None at all.”
Bonin thought he recognised the voice. “You sure?”
“Yes!” the pilot snapped and looked back at him. There wasn’t much to
see of the face through the visor of the pressure mask, but Bonin recognised
the eyes of Commander Jagdea.
“Hello,” he said.
“Scout Trooper Bonin,” she replied. “I thought you were hurt?”
“The break was treated and fused and I’m all strapped up in a pressure
sling. You can fly a Marauder one-handed anyway. Not like a Lightning.”
“Whatever. Just so long as you’re okay. You volunteer for this?”
“They asked for volunteers, yes.”
“You must like us,” Bonin ventured. She didn’t answer. “The engines
shouldn’t be doing that, should they?”
She looked back at him again. “No, all right? No, they shouldn’t. We’ve
got a misfire problem. But I’m not going to let it affect the mission. I’ll get
you there.”
“I’m sure you will,” said Bonin.
The shoal’s luck lasted until they were almost in sight of Ouranberg. About
ten kilometres out, the scald-storm suddenly collapsed and faded, sinking its
fires into the lower stratum and leaving the air bare and empty.
The Ouranberg defences picked them up almost immediately. The fighters
were on them about two minutes later.
The cloud-hunters went through the shoal on afterburner, crossing
north/south. Two stricken Magogs, on fire, ploughed their way down on steep
dives into the Scald. A Navy Marauder ceased to be in a blizzard of shrapnel
and ignited gas.
As the enemy craft banked round for another pass, they met the Imperial
fighter escort. Through the cabin’s slit window, Milo could see streams of
tracers and bright flashes flickering against the clouds.
A brilliant light suddenly shone back through the cockpit, shafting down
into the cabin.
“What was that?” asked Adare.
“The pathfinders just lit up the target,” the pilot announced. “Five minutes.
Go to stand by.”
The Ghosts all struggled to their feet. Cardinale moved between them,
tugging out the air hoses that had linked them to the ship’s supply and cutting
in their own air-bottles.
“You’re running on internal now,” he voxed. They nodded their
understanding.
Then he opened each jump pack back-plate in turn and threw the start-up
rocker switches. Lift power, a blessed relief from the weight, kicked in. The
outside roar was so great they couldn’t even hear the turbines.
Cardinale unplugged and refitted his own air hose and then turned his back
to Nessa so she could throw his pack switches. Doyl moved to the back hatch
and put his hand on the release lever.
They all watched the screen.
The first main wave came over the vast bulk of Ouranberg, which was
already lit up with flares and combustion bombs. Dragging slowly through
the air, the Magogs began to spill bombs from their bellies. Air-cracking
flashes slammed out from each hiss of fire.
Above and around the bomber shoal, the fighters danced with the enemy in
a furious dog-fight guided mostly by modar. Already, the ground batteries had
opened up in full force. Floral patterns of flak decorated the air. Rockets
lashed upwards. Hydra batteries zippered the air with tracer rounds.
One of the Magogs blew apart a single engine nacelle still spinning its
prop as it dived downwards, on fire like a comet. Another was caught in the
spotlights and hammered with flak until it fell apart. A Behemoth, hit in the
wing-base by a rocket, dipped slowly towards the city, on fire, and struck the
Beta dome edge, causing an explosion that sent flame out more than five
hundred metres.
Another was hit as it was opening its bomb-bay. The explosion took out
the craft either side of it.
On a cue from Babbist, Nour wrenched open the side hatch of Larisel 4.
Typhoon-force wind galed in, rocking them all. Nour flinched back, seeing
the Navy Marauder flying next to them in the formation suddenly ignite and
veer towards them.
The stricken craft, bleeding flames from behind the cockpit, missed them
by only a few metres and dropped away, its fire trail marking out a spiral as
it accelerated to its doom.
All that Nour had seen in the split second before the Marauder had pitched
away was the pilot and the fore-gunner, hammering at the perspex of their
screens, trying to break out as fire sucked into the crew spaces they
occupied.
“Ready for drop,” Mkoll cried.
Nour shook himself. He couldn’t get the image of the burning, hammering
pilot out of his head. “Ready.”
Babbist ushered Cocoer and Rilke up to the hatch.
The DZ’s for Larisel had been selected carefully. Larisel 1, Varl’s mob, was
to drop onto the main vapour mills, with Larisel 4, under Mkoll’s command,
dropping on the mill worker hab-domes to the north-west Adare’s unit,
Larisel 3, was going after the secondary vapour mills, and Larisel 2, under
Meryn’s control, was jumping on Beta dome.
Flak whickered up at them from the city. The first wave of Magogs had
hammered Beta dome. Patterns of throbbing fire pulsed below: pin-points or
clusters. White-hot fires raged up into the night and secondary explosions
rippled through the domes.
“Go!” said Cardinale.
Milo leapt from the Marauder. He was instantly struck by a fierce
sideways force, a hammerblow of slipstream that turned him over and over.
He tumbled, stunned, and fell, gunning his pack. Nothing seemed to happen.
“Relax, relax into it…” Cardinale said over the link, barely audible over
the raging wind.
Ouranberg was coming up very fast and very hard. Milo yanked at his
thruster control. Training had been all well and good, but nothing could have
prepared him for leaping into space in this kind of cross-wind. He was being
swept clear of the DZ.
Milo saw Nessa and Adare dropping past him, spread-eagled, trimming
their thrusters. He slid in behind them, the wind tearing at his mask.
The vast, dull-grey dome of the secondary mill rose up in front of him, a
small city in its own right.
He coasted in.
Larkin passed out as he left the hatch. It was partly fear, and partly the
sledgehammer thump of the wind. He came round, felt his entire body
vibrating and saw nothing but oily blackness. “Larkin! Larkin!”
He realised he was falling on his back. He fought to right himself, overcueing
the jump-pack controls so he shot up like a cork. The wind was a
thundering, buffeting howl in his ears. There was no sign of Mkvenner,
Kersherin, Kuren or Meryn. The wounded, battered shape of the Beta dome
was twinkling with hundreds of fires. He tried to make sense of it, tried to
match what he saw to the carefully memorised picture of the cityscape and
the DZ in his head.
Then he saw Meryn, passing him twenty metres to his left, looking stiff and
awkward but at least in control. Squeezing his handgrip, he propelled himself
after the sergeant.
Larisel 1 was two minutes short of its DZ, juddering through flak, when the
engines finally failed. Jagdea yelled at them to go, fighting to keep the nose of
the leaden craft up as long as she could. They bailed: Vadim, Unterrio,
Banda, Varl. Bonin hesitated, and clambered back to the cockpit ladder. The
Marauder was beginning to vibrate wildly.
“Come on!” he cried. “Move it! You’ve both got chutes! Come on!”
Jagdea pushed him back. There was a bright burst right outside the cockpit
dome and flak sent ribbons of metal and glass spearing in at them. Bonin
didn’t have to look to see that the co-pilot was dead.
“Jagdea!” he bellowed, grabbing at her.
Stalling out, the Marauder rolled over onto its back and entered a terminal
swan dive. Bonin was upside down, pressed into the roof, the harness of his
jump-pack half-choking him.
Fighting the mounting G-force, Jagdea pulled a lever that fired the
explosive bolts in the cockpit canopy’s frame, and the damaged canopy
ripped away entirely. She unbuckled her restraint harness and pulled at Bonin
hard, yanking him up into the cockpit. The force of the wind did the rest,
sucking them both up and out of the diving craft and scattering them away into
the sky.
“Are we on the target?” asked Mkoll. “I don’t know!” said Babbist. “Are we
on the target?”
“The damn aimer is off-line!” Babbist yelled, struggling to get the
flickering, rolling image to freeze. “We’re going to overshoot if we’re not
careful,” said Nour. “We go, we go now!” Mkoll decided. “But—” Babbist
began. “We go now!”
Mkoll moved to the hatch. “Come on! Line up and out!”
There was an odd bump, like something had flicked at his inner ear. Mkoll
swayed and looked round. There was a smouldering hole in the deck of the
cabin where a large calibre tracer round had punched through, killing
Babbist on its way up to the roof. Nour had been knocked down, and Rilke
and Cocoer were trying to lift him.
“Come on!” Mkoll cried. A shower of sparks blinded him. More tracer
was riddling the cabin, ripping through the hull-skin. He heard Rilke scream
and Nour yelling, “It’s going! It’s going! It’s going!”
Varl landed a damn sight harder than he might have wished, and lay for a
moment on a section of reinforced roof plating, winded and bruised. Unterrio
appeared over him, grabbing him by the hands and pulling him up. “Feth,”
said Varl.
They were on a wide manufactory roof structure adjoining the main vapour
mill, high up above Ouranberg with only the mill chimneys and the crag of
Ouranpeak rising above them. The sky was a bright fury, but the raid now
seemed far away.
Banda had made it down on a roof section adjacent to theirs, and as they
went down to join her, using the lift of the packs to bounce themselves along
as if on springs, they heard Vadim calling urgently over the vox.
Unterrio spotted the young Verghastite up on the inspection walkway of a
chimney flue. He was pointing up at the sky.
“There! There!” he said.
Varl looked. He wasn’t sure what he was looking for, then he saw what
Vadim’s sharp eyes had already detected. A Marauder, about a kilometre and
half away, turning south in a loop. It had to be Mkoll’s bird, Larisel 4,
making its pass on the mining habs.
Then he realised it was on fire.
“Feth, they had better—” he began. The Marauder exploded in mid-air. A
big sphere of white light expanded in the sky and then was gone.
Mkoll, Rilke, Nour, Cocoer… just gone. Vital men, friends…
A whole team finished before they’d even begun.
LARISEL AND THUNDERHEAD
THE ASSAULT ON OURANBERG, PHANTINE,
224 to 226.771, M41
“Right through the specialist training, we’d all had this feeling of
confidence, like the beloved Emperor was with us in all things. Then we
were on the ground, and Mkoll and the others were dead, and we started to
realise we didn’t stand a chance.”
—Brin Milo, 3rd Team trooper, Tanith First
ONE
They had to get off the roof-space fast. Thick streams of black smoke from
petrochemical fires and incendiary bursts were washing back across them
and across the roof structures of the Ouranberg’s secondary vapour mill.
The smoke was pouring from the main city, carried by the powerful highaltitude
winds and, if the Emperor was with them, it would have concealed
them in the last stages of their jump.
But from the moment he was down, Doyl had been surveying the area.
There were six defence towers in the immediate vicinity, all of them with
decent views of the roof where they had landed, smoke or no smoke.
The five members of Larisel 3 hurried into the cover of a ventilator stack
and got down. No firing had come their way; indeed, two of the towers were
still spitting tracer streams at Imperial aircraft peeling off the target.
“Did they see us?” Milo voxed.
“We’re alive, aren’t we?” replied Sergeant Adare. “I think their attention
is on the sky above.”
“Check in,” voxed Specialist Cardinale. “Any injuries? Any equipment
losses?” There were none apparently. Adare made a special point of signing
to Nessa to make sure she was okay.
“Did you hear what they said?” muttered Doyl. “Sergeant Varl, on the vox,
as we were coming in?”
Milo had. A brief, incomplete, dreadful message-burst. Mkoll’s craft had
gone up short of its drop point.
“I can’t believe it—” he murmured.
“Me neither,” said Adare. “God-Emperor rest their souls. But there’s
nothing we can do about it. Except go on with this and get some fething payback.”
Adare raised his gloved hand and exchanged palm-slaps with Doyl, Milo
and Nessa. Cardinale hesitated and then smacked his own hand against
Adare’s proffered gauntlet. Milo knew Adare was trying to make sure the
Phantine felt like part of the team.
In truth, Milo had returned Adare’s palm-slap with little conviction
himself. The loss of Mkoll was a profound shock. The scout sergeant had
always seemed invulnerable, one of those Ghosts who would never fall.
Milo even felt a little envious of Nessa. She couldn’t read their lips because
of the visors and no one had signed her the news. He’d been worried about
how she might cope with the mission given her disability, but now it seemed
she was lucky to be spared the bad news. At least for a while.
Doyl led them down the length of the ventilator stack and then across a
narrow open space to the cover of some galvanised pipework. They moved
sluggishly and heavily, even though the grav-units of their jump-packs were
still on to ease the burden.
Cardinale helped Doyl out of his jump pack and the scout hurried on alone,
looking for an entry point while the others got rid of their packs. Adare and
Cardinale stowed the heavy units in a stack under the pipework, lashed them
in place with rope and concealed them with a scrim net. Milo doubted there
would be many foot patrols up here in the toxic atmosphere outside the dome,
but the last thing they wanted was for the enemy to find traces of a troop
landing.
They were still weighed down with kit, helmets and the armoured smocks,
but now they felt a thousand times lighter. Nessa had taken her long-las out of
its cover and assembled it, though with her visor in place, there was no point
aligning the scope. Milo peeled the adhesive tape off his U90’s twenty-five
round clip and replaced it with a drum magazine marked with a red cross —
the special armour-piercing load. Adare collected in and pocketed the plastic
muzzle stoppers. Then he gently tried his vox-link. They’d picked up Varl’s
strangled message whilst still in the air. Now they were down, the hard
structures of Ouranberg were blocking anything but short-range transmission.
As Daur had predicted in his last briefing, there was going to be no contact
between teams once the mission was underway. A full-gain vox-caster would
have weighed one of them down unnecessarily. Besides, it wasn’t impossible
that the enemy was scanning for vox-calls on the known Imperial
wavelengths.
Milo hunched down so that he had a good firing position, covering the
space all the way from the pipework to what looked like a row of short
exhaust flues on the edge of the roof section. Despite the bitter cold, he was
hot, and he could feel cold sweat running down his spine. It was getting
harder to breath. They were probably reaching the limit of their air-bottles.
Doyl reappeared. He had unshipped his camo-cloak and shrouded himself
with it.
“Got a possible entry point. Thirty metres that way. Looks like a
maintenance hatch and it’s locked, but we should be able to force it.”
They ran forward, low, in single file, after his lead. The hatch was thick
with rust and lay in the side of a raised hump in the roof, under the lea of an
exposed roof spar. Milo and Cardinale stood look-out to either side with
weapons ready as Adare and Doyl examined the hatch.
“I don’t think it’s pressurised,” said Adare.
“Me neither. We get through this and maybe down inside to a sealed door.”
“Cut it,” Adare said.
Doyl took out a compact cutting torch, said the prayer of ignition, lit its
small energy blade and sliced into the lock. There were a few sparks and a
slight glow, but Adare held his camo-cloak out to screen the work.
Once the teeth of the lock were cut Doyl used his knife to force the
corroded hatch out of its frame Adare led the way in, a lamp pack locked to
his lasrifle’s bayonet lug. The chamber appeared to be a circulation space
around the head of an elevator assembly. Heavy machinery, caked in grease,
jutted up out of the floor. Even with his helmet on, Milo could hear the wind
moaning through rust holes in the metal roof-cover.
Doyl located a floor hatch in the far corner and they snuggled down a short
ladder into dark attic spaces that filled the cavity between the mill’s outer
roof and inner pressurised hull. It was now getting very hard to breathe.
The floor beneath them was a skin of clean metal ribbed with tension
members. Unwilling to find out if the inner hull skin was load-bearing, they
edged along the ribbing. After about fifty metres, they came across a break in
the inner roof where rockcrete support piles of staggering proportions rose
through to buttress the main roof.
One had metal rungs fused into the side, and they descended again,
carefully, hand over hand, weapons slung on their backs.
Twenty metres down, the way was blocked. A huge moulded collar of
industrial plastene sheathed the descending piles and sealed them against the
downward sloping rim of roof-skin. Adare believed they would have to go
back, but Milo spotted an almost invisible inspection plate in the metal skin.
With Adare supporting his weight, Doyl leaned out from the rungs and
pressed against the plate until it fell into the cavity behind. Doyl swung over
and clambered through. A moment later, he voxed them to follow.
They were in a crawl space under the inner skin, and there was barely
room to stand. Doyl replaced the plate which had rubberised edging and
formed a seal by being held in place by the internal pressure. Milo could feel
the rush of air going out past him until Doyl got the plate back in position.
Gratefully, they unplugged their air-tubes and slid their visors up. The air
was thin and cold and had a rough taste in it that stung their throats. But they
were now inside the pressurised section of the mill.
“Did we trip an alarm?” Cardinale asked.
“I don’t think so,” replied Doyl, checking the frame of the plate for signs
of leads or breakers. “The atmosphere processors might have lost a tiny
amount of pressure while the plate was open, but I doubt it was enough for
them to have noticed.”
“In case they did, and they’re able to pinpoint the source, let’s get moving
anyway,” said Adare.
They hunched their way down the crawl space. It opened out dramatically,
stretching out further than the eye could see, but didn’t get any deeper. Doyl
scouted around, and found a hatch in the floor some forty metres off. It was
heavy-duty, Imperial design, and electronically locked.
The scout worked fast. He taped one of the six miniature circuit-breakers
he carried in his tool-roll to the hatch frame, and secured its leads to either
side of the lock. He waited until the little green rune on its casing lit up,
indicating that the hatch’s alarm circuit was now looping via the breaker, and
then cut through the lock-tongue with his cutting torch. Though there was no
immediate scream of klaxons, it was impossible to tell if the alarm had been
bypassed, so they dropped through the hatch quickly and pulled it shut behind
them.
The hatch had let them down into a maintenance corridor, old and dingy,
and poorly lit. Centuries of condensation had rusted the walls, rotted the matboards
and encouraged thick, lurid mould growths along the ceiling. The
corridor ran north/south.
“South,” said Adare confidently, and they moved off. South, the direction
of the main city structure of Ouranberg. And the creature they had come to
kill.
It had taken Bonin a full ninety seconds to gain control of his jump-pack, and
that had felt like an eternity: tumbling, wheeling, spinning, with no sense of
up or down. Somehow, Jagdea had shown the good sense to cling on to him,
despite the violence of their drop.
By the time he had squeezed enough lift out of the grav-units to pull them
both up, and begun to compensate for their drift with the turbines, they were
well out to the east of Ouranberg.
“Hold on!” he voxed.
“My chute’s intact! I’ll drop!” she replied.
“Where to?” he asked. Below their dangling feet there was nothing but the
frothing, fire-lit expanse of the Scald.
“It doesn’t matter—”
“No! Just hold on!” His voice over the link sounded tinny and dull. The
night winds beat and tugged at them.
Cautiously, Bonin nudged them towards the gloomy city, using little squirts
of turbine power to buoy them along like a leaf on a racing stream. The
crosswinds seemed to be with them, but every now and then, the gale
suddenly gusted against them, and the pair were turned or blown back.
“Your grip still good?”
“Yes.” She had her hands and forearms locked up under his chest harness.
He realised he had his right arm protectively clutched around her left
shoulder, gripping the top of her inflator-chute’s shoulder webbing.
“We’re going to need more lift,” he said, depressing the red stud on the
handgrip. The grey, eastern slopes of what had to be Gamma dome were
looming in front of them like a mountain range.
They almost didn’t clear Gamma dome. Bonin had to fight to stop the
crosswinds smashing them into the outer hull, and the jump pack seemed to
be struggling to find enough lift. Vortices of wind created by the dome’s
angular surface eddied them like chaff. And though, by the altimeter, they
were climbing fast the dome seemed to go on forever.
Gamma dome seemed to have been virtually untouched by the raid, though
great flickers of orange and white lit the sky and the clouds behind it where
Beta dome was ablaze.
As they hugged the curve of the dome up towards the summit a different
level of wind patterns took over and suddenly started to carry them up with
increasing speed. The dome-hull flicked by underneath them, and Bonin had
to pull hard to the left to avoid collision with a protruding mast.
Then they were over, passing the massive icy crag of Ouranpeak, and
dropping towards the main vapour mill.
“Varl! Banda! Vadim! Respond!” Bonin voxed. Foolishly, he had imagined
his biggest problem was going to be getting anywhere near the mill. Now,
seeing the size of it, he realised that finding his team mates was going to be a
much taller order.
He repeated his calls as often as he dared. They soared down past a
scaffolding tower structure that suddenly lit up and roared with heavy anti-air
fire.
They weren’t the target. The tower was plugging away at a Shrike divebomber
that had misjudged its run. But Bonin had been concentrating so hard
on steering and guiding, he hadn’t even thought about the defence points and
towers Ouranberg bristled with.
It was a sudden, sobering thought. Perhaps it was that they presented such
a tiny target perhaps luck was with them, but it now seemed like a miracle
that they hadn’t been spotted, tracked and fired on by any of the gun
emplacements on Gamma dome.
Luck, Bonin decided. He couldn’t see it because of the high, covering
cirrocumulus, but he was sure his lucky star was still up there somewhere.
However, it wouldn’t be for long.
“Brace yourself, Jagdea,” he said.
“What? Oh sh—”
They dipped onto a lattice-truss roof in the shadow of mill head, but the
angle was bad, the deceleration a little premature, and the roof a good deal
steeper than Bonin had judged.
They bounced once, denting the alloy siding hard, and rolled, flying apart.
Jagdea bounced again, twice, cried out in pain as the impacts jarred her
recently-knitted break, and slithered to the edge of the guttering.
Bonin tried to gun the turbine, but the first impact had buckled the control
arm and he couldn’t find it. He crashed over the gutter, slammed into the side
of a storage tank, and blacked out.
“Nice landing,” he heard Jagdea say as he came round. She was hunched
over him, tugging loose the buckles of his harness. “Anything broken?”
“I don’t think so.”
He sat up. He had landed on a strip of roof between the tank and the raised
section where they had first tried to set down. The strip was a tarnished
sluice of metal matted with wet filth where the upper roof structures drained
water away. Looking round he saw that if he had continued to roll or slide, he
would have gone clean off a fifty metre drop into a derrick assembly.
Together, they scrambled up the strip and onto a slab roof behind the tanks.
Bonin prepped his lasrifle and Jagdea took out a service issue Navy pistol.
He tried the vox again, but there was still no signal from his team.
They hurried west crossing a walkway over a storage vat full of oily water
with a surface sheen like rainbows. Nearby, a cluster of bare metal flues
breathed burning gases into the sky.
The vox crackled. Bonin thought it might be Varl and the others, and
retuned to get a clearer signal. What he heard then was guttural and nothing
like Low Gothic.
He pulled Jagdea into cover just as three Blood Pact troopers in full
hostile environment armour appeared on their tail, running up to the far end
of the walkway over the vat. Their bobbing crimson bowl-helms reflected
brightly in the dark fluid.
One had already seen them, and squeezed off a burst from his lascarbine.
The shots thumped into the ducting they were crouched behind.
Bonin took aim. He fired a snap shot that winged the first Blood Pact
trooper and checked the advance of the others. They all started shooting,
making the ducting ring with the rapid hits.
The trooper he had winged tried to sprint across the walkway as the others
covered him. Bonin put a las-round through his shoulder and then another into
his iron-masked face. The trooper fell off the walkway loose-limbed and
splashed into the vat, throwing up a heavy surge in the viscous liquid.
Bonin grabbed the pilot by the hand and they ran back down the length of
the roof towards a row of large heat-exchangers that sprouted from the
galvanised panels like dove-cotes. Las-bolts licked through the air around
them.
As soon as they were down behind one of the exchangers, Bonin fired
again. Two more Blood Pact had appeared on an adjacent roof, firing down
from a chain-fenced walkbridge. It wouldn’t take long for the four Chaos
soldiers to coordinate a crossfire.
Shots spanked into the metal housing of the exchanger. Bonin fired low and
hit one of the troopers on the walkbridge in the chest. The man collapsed and
hung where his webbing had caught on the chain rail.
Another flurry of rounds slammed into the exchanger, and the entire top
casing, a dome of thin metal, was wrenched off. Jagdea fired her pistol, but
her aim wasn’t great.
A shot ripped past near to Bonin’s shoulder. The second man on the
walkbridge had moved up, and was close to having the drop on them. There
was nowhere to run without risking the steady firing of the advancing pair on
their level.
The Blood Pact trooper on the bridge suddenly lurched forward so hard
his body snapped the chain rail and he tumbled into the void.
“What the feth…?” Bonin began.
The two on the roof glanced around for a second, puzzled, and in that time
a single, fierce las-shot exploded the head of the nearest.
Bonin snatched up his las and fired a burst on auto at the remaining foe.
The Blood Pact trooper ducked down again behind a stanchion and didn’t
reappear.
“Hold your fire, Bonin,” a voice said over the link.
Varl appeared from behind the stanchion, sheathing his warknife.
“We’re clear. Banda?”
“Nothing from up here, sarge.”
“Vadim?”
“Clear.”
“Unterrio?”
“Clear also. No movement.”
Varl hurried across to Bonin and Jagdea.
“Gotta move. Come on. Thought we’d lost you.” They ran after him, up a
fire-stair onto an upper roof overlooking the walkbridge. “How didn’t you?”
Bonin asked.
“We heard your calls, and followed the signal. The bastards have got men
up on the roof. Not because of us, I don’t think. They brought down a lot of
planes in the raid, and they’re checking for ditched air-crew.”
“You sure about that?”
“No,” said Varl.
Banda rose from cover on the upper roof as they clambered up. Bonin was
sure her long-las had taken out two of the enemy. “Nice shooting,” he said.
“S’what they give the shiny medals for,” she returned. She nodded at
Jagdea. “I see you brought a friend,” she remarked ironically.
“Jagdea got us here alive, Banda. Least I could do was return the favour.”
“Gak! Down boy! I was only saying.”
Vadim and Unterrio came up a side-ladder and joined them.
“Good,” said Varl. “Maybe now we’re all finally here, we can get on.
Roofscape’s crawling with bad guys. I suggest we get inside.”
“You found a way in?” asked Bonin.
Varl looked at him, his eyes staring sarcastically through his visor. “No we
haven’t — a) because we were looking for your sorry arse, I don’t recall
why, and b) because isn’t that your job, Mister Scout?”
“Point,” admitted Bonin.
“Can we do it soon?” said Banda. “This air-bottle’s choking me up.”
“Okay, follow Bonin’s lead, fireteam cover!” Varl ordered.
Jagdea caught Varl by the sleeve. “Sergeant. I know I’m… not meant to be
here. I think it’s best if I stay put and give myself up.”
“No!” said Bonin.
“Like Boney said, commander: no,” Varl agreed. “I appreciate the loyalty,
but I’m not infantry trained, and certainly not covert-skilled like you. I’m
dead weight. You should ditch me now. I understood the importance of this
mission when I volunteered. I don’t want to compromise it.”
“You’re coming with us. End of debate,” Varl said.
“I’ll take my chances, sergeant—”
“No!” said Varl.
“Commander Jagdea has a point, sergeant,” said Unterrio. “We will be
quicker and safer without her. This operation is too vital to risk. And like me,
the commander is a Phantine. We care about the liberation of this world more
than we care about our own lives.”
“Listen to Unterrio, sergeant,” said Jagdea. “You’ve just killed a search
party up here. Leave me for the Blood Pact to find, and I’ll tell them it was
me. Just a downed pilot. All they’re expecting. It’ll cover your presence.”
Varl tightened the strap on his U90 thoughtfully. “I said no, I meant no. For
one thing, they’d know you didn’t do it unless we leave you with a long-las
and a warknife, which I’m not prepared to do, because it would make them
ask even more questions. For another… I’m not taking you out of kindness.
Have you any idea how savage their interrogations would be? You wouldn’t
last. None of us would. Your ‘downed pilot’ story would collapse so fething
quickly you’d be selling us and your planet and your family. No, commander.
No. You’re coming. For our sake, not yours.”
For Larisel 2, entry was easy. Huge sections of Beta dome were left
punctured and shattered by the raid, and significant parts of it were still on
fire. Gathering near the mast array at the dome’s apex, the five-member team
crossed onto the western side, and roped down to a collapsed roof section
that was still issuing flame and smoke.
With Larkin covering them, Mkvenner and Meryn clambered down into the
gash and secured the interior space. It was a habitat chamber, totally
scorched through. Mkvenner picked his way across toasted carpet and found
a door melted into its frame by the heat of the detonation that had blown out
the room.
Sergeant Meryn kicked his way through smouldering ply-board and opened
a side room that had also been gutted by the blast. A bomb had splintered
straight through the floor here and gone off in the level beneath. There was a
jagged hole in the flooring next to the atomised remains of a bed or a couch.
“Move down and form up,” Meryn voxed.
Kersherin, Larkin and Kuren dropped down through the roof, and
Mkvenner led them through to Meryn. They looked down through the floor
hole. Distant sirens were wailing, set off by the multiple breaches to the
dome’s pressurised shell.
“Nothing for the next two floors,” Mkvenner commented. The bomb had
indeed demolished everything beneath them for two floors, partly through its
impact and partly through its blast. Larkin glanced up and saw a standard
dining fork impaled through a wall beam. The blast had turned even everyday
objects into lethal shrapnel.
“Let’s rope it,” Meryn decided. Mkvenner secured one end of his lineloop
and lowered himself through the smouldering hole in the floor.
They swung down one level. Larkin tried to look away from the two
blackened corpses that the detonation had crushed into the wall. The
surviving shreds of the floor supported half a bureau, a litter of debris, the
scattered pages of a book, and a miraculously unbroken vase.
Another level down and there was a floor again. The surface had been
stripped off by extreme heat, and they balanced on the joists. One half of the
room, a bed chamber, was eerily untouched. There was a tethwood chair, a
shelf with drinking glasses and ornaments, and a good quality carpet that
ended suddenly in a singed line where the floor had burned out. Discarded
clothes hung over the chair. The only sign of damage in that half of the room
was a slight blistering of the paint on the walls.
Mkvenner crossed to the door and opened it a slit. There was a corridor
outside, plunged into emergency lighting.
“Let’s go!” he voxed, and they followed him out into the hall in a fireteam
spread.
Larkin was shaking. It was partly the trauma of the drop, partly combat
tension, but mostly the shock of the news that Mkoll hadn’t made it. He felt
one of his migraine headaches pumping horror into his skull. He’d had the
foresight to bring his tablets. Daur, Gaunt and Meryn had all insisted.
But with his visor down and working off his air-bottle, he couldn’t take
one.
They’d got about ten metres down the hallway when a three man
emergency crew appeared, dressed in flame retardant white overalls and
rebreathers. They panicked at the sight of the troopers and turned to flee.
“Oh, feth. Take them.” Meryn’s order was terse but necessary.
Kuren and Kersherin opened fire and cut down the trio. It didn’t feel right
Kuren thought. It didn’t feel right at all, but they had to preserve their
secrecy. Another emergency worker appeared and started running towards
the elevator at the end of the hall. He had abandoned a blast victim who
lolled on a stretcher in the open doorway of a room.
Mkvenner fired and the worker slammed over against the wall, slid down,
and lay for a moment drumming his feet against the deck before he died.
“Feth,” said Mkvenner with distaste.
“We have to blow this hall,” Meryn said. “They find shot bodies, they’ll
know we’re here as good as if we left these poor fethers to talk. Blow it, and
it’ll look like a delayed fuse bomb going off.”
Mkvenner nodded and pulled out a couple of tube charges from his
musette. Larkin watched, still shaking. This ruthlessness was a side of
Corporal Meryn he hadn’t seen before. Meryn, one of the younger Ghosts,
was an able and reliable soldier. His service record was excellent, but Gaunt
had not yet advanced him. Rawne, however, had recently taken Meryn under
his wing. Now, it seemed, he was aiming to prove himself, taking no chances
that might vitiate successes for the mission. He was doing things the way his
hard-arsed mentor Rawne would do them. It wasn’t the Meryn Larkin knew.
He didn’t like it, even though he knew it was the smart way to go.
“Larkin! Come on! We’re leaving!” said Meryn, and they hurried down
into the stairwell next to the elevator as tube charge blasts blew the hall out
of the side of the dome above them.
Gaunt took the data-slate from his adjutant Beltayn and looked it over.
“Is this confirmed?”
“The data came via Admiral Ornoff.”
As far as the admiral could report, two of the Larisel craft had been
destroyed before they had reached the target. Larisel 2 and Larisel 3 had
landed. Ornoff believed from pilot reports that some if not all of Larisel 1
had dropped before their Marauder had gone down.
That was something.
Larisel 4 had exploded outright well short of the city. No survivors. No
chutes. “Oh dear God-Emperor,” Gaunt sighed. “Mkoll.”
TWO
Five hundred air-horns simultaneously rasped out a long, blearing note, and
workers started to shuffle around Ouranberg’s secondary vapour mill in their
thousands. It was a shift change, but there would be no rest for the gangs
coming off station. Grim tannoy announcements ordered them to collect meal
pails from their designated canteens and then assemble at the main bascule.
There they would be broken into work details and sent across the causeway
to Ouranberg itself, to assist in the rebuild and recovery.
“Failure to report will result in reprisal punishment of all members of an
individual’s work gang,” the tannoy emphasised over and over. The voice,
already distorted by the bass-heavy vox-repeater, had a thick, hard accent
and spoke in a monotone as if reading the words without understanding them.
“Reprisal punishment will be immediate. No excuses. Report to the assembly
yard of the main bascule in twenty minutes.”
The long, expressionless declaration repeated itself several times, the
delays and echoes of the capacious turbine halls turning it into a tuneless
canon of overlaps.
No one complained. No one dared. The workers trudged from their posts
and filed silently into the wire-caged walks that led away from the mill,
while others hobbled in the opposite direction down parallel cage-ways to
take their places. The air was thick with dust, and smelled like it was rotting,
a byproduct of the ozone and pollutants generated by the mill. Yellowish light
glared from mesh-basket lamps, flickered by the turning rotors of the sootheavy
ceiling fans.
Blood Pact personnel, armed with pain-goads and synapse disrupters,
walked above the cage-ways on grilled platforms. Some of them, stripped
down to black leather bib-overalls and iron masks, restrained leashed packs
of snarling cyber-mastiffs with sweat-slick, corded arms and shouted abuse
at stragglers. These were brutes from Warlord Slaith’s slaver force, a
specialised unit of the Blood Pact which enforced the Chaos army’s
occupation. Their cruel, relentless methods ensured that the captured
workforce maintained output and serviced the industries Slaith had
conquered. On Gigar, the slavers had worked the captive locals, night and
day, for eight weeks, setting their canines on twenty individuals every time
one slackened or collapsed. At the end of eight weeks, the wells of Gigar had
produced enough promethium to fuel sixty Blood Part motorised regiments
for a year. And the hate-dogs were fat.
The workers of Ouranberg had been reduced to an almost zombie-like
state, deprived of sleep, of decent food, of enough fluids. Distinctions of sex
and age had vanished. All were swaddled in overalls and rag bandages stiff
with grey dust. Coarse canvas hoods or shawls, similarly grey, draped them
like monks. They were hunched and submissive. Battered rebreathers and
work gauntlets dangled beneath the edges of their shrouds. Raw, blackbandaged
feet left limping trails of blood on the dusty floor.
Though Ornoff’s persistent bombing campaign might have been hurting
Slaith’s forces, it was turning the lives of the slave workers from a living
hell to something indescribably worse. Every waking hour had to be spent on
repair and rebuild work.
Slaith knew an invasion was coming, and he intended to throw it back by
making Ouranberg a fortress. It was believed that the slavers were lacing the
workers’ meagre rations with stimulants to force them into twenty-four hour
activity. Already, many had died of convulsive fits, or gone berserk and
thrown themselves at the Blood Part guns.
The air-horns blared again. The tannoy repeated its monotone order. A
work crew from the mill’s ninth level channeled down the narrow cage-way
towards the stair flights that would take them to the assembly yard.
Just inside the mouth of the caged walk, a worker stumbled and fell against
the chain-fence. A Blood Pact guard on the overhead platform jabbed down
with his pain-goad, but the crumpled worker was out of reach. His fellow
workers just hurried past him, not wanting to get involved. The slavers
pushed their way into the cage, shoving aside the workers who were too
slow-moving. The hate-dogs bayed.
“Don’t,” hissed Adare, squeezing Milo’s arm as they shuffled forward.
Screams echoed down the chamber. One of the Blood Pact started shooting
into the crowd.
“Just keep going, for feth’s sake,” Adare whispered.
Milo fought back the urge to throw off his filthy shawl and open fire with
the U90 lashed tight under his right armpit. The screams were unbearable.
“We’re dead if you even think about it,” Adare mumbled.
The members of Larisel 3 moved on with the trudging mob. All of them
were shrouded with stolen rags, grey dust rubbed liberally into their hands
and kit. Doyl had swathed their boots and lower legs with bandage wraps,
and dirt had been rubbed in there too. They walked with shoulders bent.
More shots rang out behind them.
Milo choked back his rage. Peering out from under his hood, he saw a
slaver standing just the other side of the chain fence, watching them all file
past. Milo was close enough to smell the bastard’s rancid body odour, and
see the ritual scars on his misshapen hands, the eight-pointed brand of Chaos
on his bare sternum. The slaver’s iron grotesque seemed to be staring right at
him. Milo tensed his hand around the heavy cannon’s trigger grip.
And then they were out, clanging down the metal stairs towards the
assembly yard.
The secondary vapour mill was built into a volcanic plug, a sister peak to
the main outcrop on which Ouranberg was constructed. It was linked to the
main city by a two kilometre long cantilever causeway suspended between
the two peaks. From the vast, dirt-filmed windows of the assembly yard, they
could see out across the majestic causeway to the monumental, domed bulk
of the dry. Through cloud-haze, a thousand lights pulsed on masts and stacks
and a million more glowed from ribbon windows and observation decks.
The yard was thronging with slave workers. Larisel 3 laced in amongst
them. Milo stuck close to Nessa in case she missed a signal from Adare.
“Worship Slaith!” boomed the tannoy suddenly. “Worship him for he is the
overlord!” The Blood Pact cheered throatily, and the workers dutifully raised
a suitable moan. “Worship Slaith, and through your toil and blood, embrace
the truth of Khorne!”
The very name made some workers wail and sob. Someone screamed.
Whips cracked into the crowd. Milo felt his gorge rise and gooseflesh quiver
across his hands and arms. That word. That foul, foul word, that name of
darkness, an animal cry from the warp. It reeked with evil, far more than the
simple combination of letters and sounds could convey. It was like a noise,
pitched on a certain frequency, that triggered involuntary fear and revulsion.
Milo had seldom heard the True Names of Chaos spoken aloud. They were
forbidden sounds, utterances that human mouths should not make.
He tried to forget it. He was terrified he would remember the name and
speak it, or have it burn into his memory. Gaunt had once taught him there
were four great names of darkness, that might arise alone, or in combination.
Milo had made it a point of personal honour not to know any of them.
“Praise the warp! The warp is the one true way! The names of the warp
are a billion and one, and each name is the lament of mankind! Worship the
warp! Praise be the warp! Through the power of the warp, the Lord of
Change will transmute the galaxy! The warp will engulf all things in a tide of
blood!”
Milo sensed Nessa was shaking, and realised with an unexpected pang of
fear that she was responding to the sounds even though she couldn’t hear the
words. He pushed her on through the crowd. He prayed to the God-Emperor
of Mankind that the tannoy wouldn’t utter that awful word again.
Cardinale had reached the gateway of the yard, where workers pressed in
to approach the bascule. He tried to block out the sounds, his hand clamped
so tight around his little silver aquila, the wingtips were puncturing his palm.
He suddenly registered the pain, and flexed his hand.
Cardinale looked back, trying to find the other members of the team
without raising his head. He spotted Adare, and Doyl. There was no sign of
the boy or the female sniper.
The gate joined the causeway via the bascule, a massive ironwork
drawbridge lowered on thick chains from the winch house overhanging the
drop. As its great bulk dropped down with a shuddering crash, Blood Pact
slavers started to whip the workers into line. They opened the gate’s barred
shutter.
An electro-lash caught the back of Cardinale’s calf and he fell to one knee
as his leg spasmed.
“Up! Up!” a nearby slaver roared, though his hoarse snarls were mainly
directed at the workers who had been completely knocked down by the whip.
Cardinale felt a strong hand support his arm and he got to his feet. Doyl
was right next to him.
“Your leg?” the scout whispered.
“It’ll be fine. We have to get through this gate.”
“I know.” Doyl turned and saw Adare a few rows behind them.
“First fifty!” yelled a slaver, speaking, like the tannoy, in a language
unfamiliar to him. “First fifty to Beta dome!”
Whips cracked and they spilled through onto the bascule and the causeway
beyond. The causeway was a rockcrete thoroughfare broad enough to take a
cargo track. It was roofed with pressurised, wire-reinforced glassite and lit
by crude strip lamps buried in the walls.
“Are they with us?” Adare whispered.
“Yeah,” replied Doyl. “Don’t look round. Milo and Nessa are about
twenty metres back. I saw them both.”
There was a hold-up. Slavers drove the work gangs against the causeway
wall in single file to let a cargo transport speed through. Cardinale took the
opportunity of the pause to stoop and rub his aching calf.
“Oh shit,” he said suddenly, “that?”
Cardinale started to search his pockets and the folds of his clothing. The
slender chain was still wrapped around his hand, but it was broken. The
silver aquila was gone.
“Move! Move!” a slaver screamed now the transport had passed. The
workers resumed their march over the causeway.
“It must have snapped off,” Cardinale said.
“Never mind that. It doesn’t matter,” Adare said.
“What if they find it?” Cardinale said, rubbing at the wingtip punctures in
his palm flesh.
“Shut up, all right? Let me worry about that.”
They were halfway across the causeway.
Okay? Milo signed surreptitiously to Nessa.
I’m fine. That was scary.
True.
They were coming up on the entry porta to Ouranberg, the cyclopean gate
house that defended the causeway and the northern approaches. Blood Pact
banners fluttered from the batteries.
Nearly there.
In the assembly yard, with the tannoy still screaming out its noxious
sermon, one of the slavers yanked on his hate-dog’s chain. It was worrying at
the filthy flagstones.
It had found something.
The slaver hunched over and raked his scarred fingers through the greasy
muck. Something silver glittered.
A tiny double-eagle. An aquila. An Imperial totem.
“Alarm!” he screamed, ejecting spittle from between his rotten teeth.
“Alarm! Alarm!”
Sirens began to whoop. The mass of slaves on the causeway looked round in
panic as the strip lights in the wall started to flash amber. The porta into
Ouranberg was so close.
“Keep going!” Adare said.
“What do we do?” Cardinale stammered.
“Keep going, like I said. We’re nearly there! Keep going and lock and
load!”
The trio elbowed their way through the milling workers, closing on the
gateway.
Behind them, Blood Pact soldiers were surging out across the bascule onto
the causeway, pushing aside mill workers, or simply gunning them down.
There was a terrible howling. The hate-dogs had been unleashed.
“Come on!” Milo urged Nessa, squeezing her arm. She surprised him by
pulling back.
“No!” she said aloud. She dragged him back against the causeway wall
amongst the cowering workers, and pulled his hood down over his head.
Nessa had fought the Verghast hive war as a scratch company guerilla. She
knew how to mingle in the ordinary, how to hide in plain sight. Though his
gut instinct told him to run, Milo remembered that, and trusted her.
He bowed his head.
Blood Pact troopers and slavers rushed past them, kicking down anyone
foolish enough to get in their way. The hate-dogs, trailing ropes of drool,
bounded ahead of them, baying, making the air stink with their rancid pelts.
Two confused mill workers were gunned down right in front of Milo and
Nessa by the Blood Pact. Their bodies lay crumpled in spreading lakes of
blood, kicked and trampled by the Chaos troopers who rushed after.
Inside the porta, alarms were also ringing. Enemy troops, their iron masks
glaring, were corralling all the slaves who had crossed the causeway to one
side of the entrance hall. They were shouting and gesturing with their
weapons.
“Feth!” said Adare as they came through the gateway, setting foot on
Ouranberg proper for the first time.
“Go with the flow,” Doyl urged. “Get in line and don’t draw attention to
yourself.”
They could all hear the howling coming closer.
“The dogs! The damned dogs!” Cardinale whined. “They’ve got my scent
—”“
Forget it!” Doyl said as loudly as he dared.
“We have to go active,” Cardinale said, fear in his voice.
“You fething well won’t until I say, Phantine!” Adare growled. “Get over!
Over to the side with the other workers!”
“But the dogs!”
The dogs were on them, bursting through the screaming workers in the
gateway, surging in towards them.
“Holy Emperor!” Cardinale yelled. He pushed Adare aside.
“Oh feth! No! Don’t! Don’t!” Adare shouted. “In the name of the Golden
Throne, Cardinale—”
Cardinale threw back his cloak disguise and wheeled round, firing his
lasrifle on full auto at the bounding hate-dogs.
He blew three of them apart, two in mid-air. The fourth, a two hundred
pound cyber-mastiff, barrelled into him and smashed him to the floor. Its
steel jaws tore into the left side of his face.
“Active!” Adare bellowed, all hope lost. “Go active, Doyl! We’ve no
fething choice!”
Sergeant Adare wrenched out his lasrifle and blasted the dog off Cardinale
point-blank.
Doyl swept round and raked the nearby Blood Pact guards with his own
rifle.
Cardinale was screaming. Blood was pouring out of his torn neck. Adare
grabbed him, his hands becoming slick with the Phantine’s gore.
“Go! Go!” Doyl yelled, shooting dead two more of the approaching dogpack.
A third hate-dog fled, howling, dragging a foreleg.
“Get him clear, sarge! Get him clear!” Doyl cried. He blasted his weapon
in a wide arc that toppled two Blood Pact sentries out of an autocannon nest
overlooking the porta’s entrance hall.
The slaves were shrieking and running in panic. Adare dragged Cardinale
to his feet and fired his lasrifle one-handed. Doyl started cutting a desperate
path for them through the frenetic mob. If they could get clear and just find
somewhere to hide…
Doyl recoiled as a las-round creased his forehead. Blood started to trickle
into his eyes. Cursing, he pulled out a tube charge, ripped off the det-tape and
hurled it to his left. The concussive blast hurled three Blood Part infantrymen
into the air and added to the wild confusion.
Firing indiscriminately at anything that looked like a Chaos trooper, Adare
cut a swathe through the press towards the north-west exit of the entrance
hall. He was virtually carrying Cardinale by then. Mill workers fled in terror
before him.
“Doyl! This way! Out this way! Come on!” Adare shouted.
Doyl, half-blinded by his own blood, followed Adare’s voice. He had to
push and kick slaves out of his way. Several of them collided mindlessly
with him.
“Adare!”
“Come on, Doyl!”
Autocannon fire chopped into the crowd, and felled a dozen workers. Doyl
could smell fycelene and the metallic scent of blood. The cannon rattled
again.
Wiping the back of his sleeve across his eyes, Doyl turned back, dropped
to one knee, and aimed at the source of the heavy fire. Blood Pact troopers
were shooting their way through the pandemonium of slaves. One had a
support cannon on a bipod, and a slaver ran beside him, feeding belts of
ammunition. The jagged muzzle flashes of the cannon illuminated the gun’s
brutal work like a strobe light. Each flare froze a snapshot of lurching
figures, slaves falling, knocked off their feet, crashing into one another Doyl
managed to shoot the gunner through the throat before his wound blinded him
again. Adare had reached the north-east exit, and stumbled into the doorway,
spilling Cardinale over. He scrambled up and lobbed a grenade high over
Doyl’s head into the mob of enemy troopers.
“Come on!” Adare screamed at Doyl over the crump-whoosh of the
grenade. “We can still do this! First and Only! First and fething Only!”
Doyl ran towards Adare’s cry.
Together, they broke out into a wide stone tunnel leading off from the
entrance hall. Smoke from the main hall was blowing in and pooling under
the arched roof. Slaves were staggering, stunned, everywhere.
“We’re clear!” Adare said to Doyl. “Help me with him!”
They each seized one of Cardinale’s wrists and started to drag him. Doyl
tried not to look at the Phantine’s rained face.
“Which way?” Adare asked.
“Left,” said Doyl.
They had only gone a few metres when a las-round caught Adare in the
knee and knocked him over. Blood Pact squads were clattering into the tunnel
from a side passage ahead of them.
“Feth!” Doyl despaired. He let go of Cardinale and fired from the hip and
scored two hits. There were so many Blood Pact and so little cover they
weren’t hard to hit.
Neither am I, Doyl thought.
The enemy squads were firing as they charged. Hard rounds and las-bolts
cracked and whined around the three Imperials. Doyl felt one pass through
his cape and another kiss painfully across his thigh. Stone chips peppered his
face from a ricochet off the tunnel wall.
Adare started shooting from a prone position, and the sergeant’s efforts
were suddenly bolstered by Cardinale. Soaked in his own blood, ignoring his
wounds, the Phantine had snuggled to his feet. He stood, swaying slightly, at
Doyl’s side, mowing down the cult warriors with haphazard bursts.
“Brace for det!” Doyl cried, and tossed another tube charge down the
tunnel into the charge. The fireball collapsed part of the roof and buried the
Blood Part squads in masonry. A crimson bowl-helmet came spinning out of
the blast and bounced off the tunnel wall.
“Cardinale! You hear me? You hear me? We can still make this!” Adare
urged, trying to rise.
Cardinale nodded, unsteady on his feet.
“Back that way,” Adare ordered. “Back down the tunnel!”
“Okay,” said Doyl. “Okay, but we need to go to ground. We can’t survive
out in the open like this.”
“Agreed!” said Adare. He turned, his next words drowned by a buzzing
roar.
Adare’s chest exploded and he was slammed back against the wall with
enough force to splinter bone. Hundreds of tiny, secondary impacts
simultaneously peppered the stonework.
Doyl staggered backwards, trying to shield Cardinale. The Phantine had
collapsed again. Doyl was sure Cardinale was dead. The scout could
suddenly smell an odour of rancid milk mixed with mint.
The beast was moving so fast the Tanith scout could barely follow it.
Using its dewclaws to grip the stones, it skittered along the tunnel roof,
upside down. An armature frame of augmetic servo-limbs clamped around its
torso automatically racked the xenos-pattern flechette blaster it had used to
slay Adare. A crude leather bandolier dangled from its gleaming, mottled
body. It gazed down its wattled snout at Doyl, doubled han lids flickering
across its milky eyes protectively.
Doyl raked it with las-fire.
It barely flinched.
Doyl screamed and fired again. He emptied his size three clip into the
beast until the power was gone.
It grabbed him by the throat with one of its powerful fore-limbs and lifted
him up. He gagged.
“The Emperor protects,” Doyl choked just before the loxatl pushed the
muzzle of its flechette blaster into his eye and fired.
“Move through! Move through!” the slavers raged, making free use of their
goads and lashes.
Rounded up again, the slave details filed through into the entrance hall.
The place was littered with debris and blood. Heretic troopers were
dragging corpses away. Are they…? Nessa signed.
Don’t think about it, Milo replied. It’s down to us now. Following the
crowd, heads down, the two survivors of Larisel 3 shuffled into the city.
Varl’s team progressed steadily down through Ouranberg’s main vapour mill
complex, following back stairs and sub-corridors. Several times, they had to
conceal themselves to avoid roaming patrols or hurrying work-gangs.
Bonin led the way. They’d ditched their extra jump kit, helmets and mail
smocks, and the Ghosts had put on their stealth-cloaks. Varl had draped
scrim-nets over Unterrio and Jagdea and smeared a little camo-paint on the
pilot’s face.
From all directions, the mill rang with the sounds of heavy labour. Drills
chattered. Hoists whirred. Turbines rambled and shook.
The tactical briefing had presumed Slaith to be secure somewhere in
Alpha dome. Varl considered it a priority to obtain more specific
information. Twice they stopped while Unterrio tried patching his data-slate
into a city-system terminal, but it was futile. Slaith’s forces had corrupted the
Imperial database and flooded it with incompatible, unreadable sequences.
They crossed a series of storage halls, and skirted the edge of an airwharf.
Here, they had to wait in hiding for almost fifteen minutes while
servitors loaded a cargo carrier. Only when the carrier lifted off the pad and
flew off in the direction of the Alpha dome did the wharf clear, allowing
them to continue. Banda paused to check a roster board hanging from one of
the wharf’s roof supports.
“Regular shipments to the Alpha dome,” she said. “Every couple of
hours.”
Varl nodded. He glanced at Jagdea. “Could you handle one of those bulk
carriers?”
“Yes,” she said.
They pressed on, but the way was blocked. Work-gangs under armed guard
were clearing bomb damage from the next manufactory space. Bonin doubled
them back, only to hear more escorted gangs tramping down the access tunnel
in their direction.
“Feth!” Varl said. They were boxed in.
“Here! In here!” Bonin hissed. He’d forced the lock on a side door. They
hurried through and he closed it behind them. They were in a small storeroom
for machine parts. It stank of oil-based lubricant. Varl and Bonin flanked the
door, weapons ready, listening to the feet marching past outside.
They could hear rough voices, and a series of vox-exchanges. Several
individuals had stopped to converse just outside the door.
Vadim pushed to the back of the store. He quietly cleared some plyboard
boxes from a grubby bench and hoisted himself up to reach a small fan-light
window high in the wall. The window was crazed with dirt, and he had to
use his pry-bar to move the latch.
Looks promising, he signed. Varl and the other Ghosts nodded. Jagdea and
Unterrio, unfamiliar with gestures, frowned.
You first, I’ll cover. Get those three through and Vadim after them, Varl’s
hands wrote in the air deftly. Bonin gave him a thumbs-up and went to the
back of the room, taking Vadim’s place on the bench. He squinted through the
fanlight and felt cool air on his face. The little window looked out onto a
circulation space between mill houses. He wedged the window open as wide
as it would go with his warknife, and slithered through head first.
At the door, Varl watched Bonin’s boots disappear. The voices outside
were still arguing, but seemed to be moving away.
Bonin’s face reappeared at the window and he reached an arm down.
Banda got up, pushed her long-las through the gap and hauled herself after it.
Vadim boosted her feet to help her on her way.
He turned and waved Jagdea up.
With Vadim pushing her feet, she was nimble enough, but the scrim-net
Varl had insisted she wear snagged on the edge of the window frame.
She struggled, pinned. Vadim got up on the bench next to her and tried to
unhook the netting. His efforts shook the old bench and wobbled the tall,
spares-laden shelving next to it.
Varl kept glancing back. Hurry the feth up! he mouthed at Vadim. He was
sure the harsh voices outside were getting closer again. He flexed his
augmetic shoulder and adjusted his grip on the heavy U90.
Vadim drew his warknife and slit through the net, freeing Jagdea. She
slithered out through the window, but the sudden motion of her release shook
the bench again. Vadim swayed, and the shelf rocked.
A tin canister full of rivets dropped off the top shelf.
Varl saw it fall as if in slow motion. He closed his eyes, waiting for the
inevitable.
There was no sound. He looked again. Unterrio had caught the canister a
few centimetres from the rockcrete floor. The look of heart-stopped relief on
the faces of Vadim and Unterrio almost made Varl burst out laughing.
Unterrio exited next. In the light of Jagdea’s difficulties, he had the sense
to take off his scrim-net and bundle it through the window ahead of him.
Vadim, crouching on the bench, looked back at Varl and beckoned him.
You go, Varl mouthed. He looked back at the door and then pressed his ear
to it. The voices were right outside now. Right out fething side.
Bonin had broken the door lock to get them in, but Varl noticed a bolt,
which he gingerly drew into place. He backed slowly from the door, keeping
his gun aimed at it.
Vadim was through the window. He leaned back in to pull Varl up.
Keeping his gun on the door, Varl sat on the bench and slowly drew his feet
up. His left boot brushed the edge of the shelf.
Two litre-capacity flasks of lamp oil toppled and smashed on the
storeroom floor.
Varl couldn’t believe he’d been so stupid.
He could hear the voices, and saw the latch being waggled furiously.
“Come on!” Vadim hissed.
There was a hammering on the door now. Kicking. Shouting.
Then shots. The metal of the door around the latch deformed and burst
under the impact of several las-rounds. The bolt still held.
Whoever was on the outside now opened fire directly at the door,
punching six molten holes. Penetrating the door metal had robbed the lasrounds
of most of their power, but they still had enough force to wind Varl
and smash him off the bench.
“Varl!” Vadim shouted. Multiple holes now riddled the door and sparking
las-shots rained into the storeroom.
“Feth!” said Varl. He was badly bruised on his shoulders and the backs of
his legs from the hits. He got up, aimed his U90 at the door and opened fire,
bracing against the recoil.
His weapon was loaded with a clip of standard .45 calibre rounds.
Striking the metal door, they dented its surface wildly, but few penetrated. An
answering storm of fire punished the door from the other side.
Varl popped the yellow-tagged drum out of his weapon, replaced it with a
red, racked back the bolt, and blitzed the door with explosive armour
piercing rounds. They went through the door like it was made of wet paper.
The surrounding wall too. The explosive bullets blew bricks and metal
shreds out into the corridor.
Varl turned, tossed the gun up to Vadim, and threw himself up through the
fan-light.
An alarm was ringing. It was quickly answered by another. Larisel 1
dashed across the circulation space and towards a gulley that formed the
waste-gutter for a small foundry.
“Not that way!” Bonin ordered, already spotting two guard towers on the
far side of the foundry. “Down here!” Another gulley, but it was piled with
precast tiles for roofing repairs.
“Good one, Boney. There’s no way through,” Banda said.
“Yes, there is,” Vadim announced and got up on the nearest pile of slabs
without breaking stride. His sure-footed climbing skills exceeded theirs, but
they followed, making it up to the top of a wall, and from there onto the
pitched roof of a walkway cloister.
They hid under the tarpaulin covers of a barrel stack in the next workyard.
“I think we had better lie low for a while,” Bonin said.
“Yeah,” panted Varl, “and then I think we go back to that wharf.”
Meryn’s team, Larisel 2, was the first to see the face of Sagittar Slaith. Every
street and plaza in Beta dome had its public address screens and pict-plates
tuned to a mesmerisingly grim live feed of various Blood Pact preachers
gibbering blasphemies and extolling the virtues of their daemonic faith. The
broadcasts were constant and relentless, captured by a fuzzy, handheld
viewer that regularly went out of focus trying to remain trained on the
capering, lunging hierarchs. They were painted, pierced devils, ranting in a
mix of their own warp-twisted language and bastardised Low Gothic. Some
would preach for hours at a time, twitching and spasming as if they were
thrashing through narcotic highs. Others would scream hysterically for a few
short minutes before disappearing. The pict image would then jump and
flicker as it cut to the next preacher.
The members of Larisel 2 tried to ignore the broadcasts, but they were
pretty much inescapable. They echoed and rang around every street and
access tunnel.
Of the team, Larkin was the most disturbed by the transmissions. On the
way down through the bombed sections of the upper habs, they had ditched
their jump kit and, freed of the visored helmet, Larkin had at last been able to
take some of his powerful anticonvulsants. He felt better for a while, but the
migraine itself merely subsided. It kept rumbling around the edges of his
brain like a storm that refused to break.
Once they got into the primary sector levels, there was a pict-address plate
on every other corner. Larisel 2 hugged back streets, sub-walkways and
deserted yards, but there was no respite from the blaring voices and jerking
pictures. Larkin felt his stress levels soaring, and the migraine began to boil
up again.
The comprehensible, Low Gothic parts of the sermons were bad. The
speech used, the concepts, the ideas, were all hard to take and often
shocking. But the gabbled warp-words were much worse, as far as Larkin
was concerned. His mind knotted as it imagined the meanings.
Worst of all, what really chilled Larkin, was the sight of Ouranberg
citizens, ragged, often weeping, watching the broadcasts. They seemed to be
under no duress. They simply stood at street corners, in squares and wide
commercial parades, gazing at the screens, their minds gradually corroding
under the poisonous bombardment of warp-lies.
Mkvenner steered them well. He had an unerring instinct for avoiding foot
patrols, and swept them into cover each time a speeder went over. They
stayed out of sight of crowds, and only once had to silence an individual who
spotted them. A middle-aged man had simply walked out into a yard as they
were sprinting across it. He had stared at them without saying a word and
then just turned and wandered back into his hab.
Meryn had broken from the group and followed the man into the building.
A few minutes later, he re-emerged and they moved on.
No one asked Meryn what he’d done. Everyone knew. Everyone knew it
was absolutely paramount to maintain the mission’s secrecy for as long as
possible. It was a necessary evil. Just like shooting the rescue crews. A
necessary evil.
Larkin didn’t like it much at all. “Necessary evil” seemed to him to be one
of those too-clever phrases men used to excuse wrongs. And there was quite
enough unnecessary evil in the fething galaxy without deliberately adding to
it.
On balance, what he really didn’t like was the fact that Meryn showed no
emotion. He remained calm, unexpressive. Probably a quality Rawne, maybe
even Gaunt, would admire as utterly professional devotion to duty. But
Larkin thought that he might feel easier about stuff if Meryn showed just one
ounce of regret or upset.
Just before dawn on the 224th, they stopped for a rest break, taking shelter
on the first floor of an abandoned weaver’s. Once the day cycle started,
movement would be restricted, and they needed to get some bag-rations
inside them and catch some sleep. The weaver’s premises, which had been
looted and then boarded up, overlooked a small municipal square full of
burned-out vehicles and litters of debris. A public-address screen on the
opposite side of the square boomed out the latest tirade of Slaith’s preachers.
Citizens stood around oil can fires gazing at the broadcast.
They ate, then Kuren took the first watch.
He woke them all after about two hours. It was still dark outside. The
lamps that should have cut in automatically at the start of the day cycle had
been shot out. Ouranberg seemed to be locked into a permanent twilight,
which Mkvenner realised would help their progress immensely.
Kuren had woken them because of the broadcasts.
The preachers had shut up, and a good fifteen minutes had gone by with
nothing on the screen but white noise.
Then Sagittar Slaith had appeared.
He was utterly terrifying.
They had been shown a few blurry longshots of a being believed to be
Slaith during the premission briefings, vague suggestions of someone tall and
heavy-set but nothing that could be called a likeness.
The face on the screen was entirely hairless: bald, shaven, lacking even
eyebrows and lashes. His ears were grossly distended by the weight and
number of the studs and rings that pierced them. They looked like a lizard’s
frill. Slaith’s teeth were chrome triangles, like the tips of daggers. Three huge
and old diagonal scars marked each cheek, ritual cuts made to seal his pact
with Urlock Gaur. He wore a white fur cloak over a spiked suit of maroon
power-armour. His eyes were pupil-less white slits.
His voice was the soft, muffled throb of a nightmare that had woken the
sleeper in terror with no clear memory of why he was afraid.
He spoke to them. Directly to them. He used Low Gothic haltingly.
“Imperial soldiers. I know you are here. I know you are here in my city
uninvited. Creeping like vermin in the shadows. I can smell you.”
“Feth!” stammered Larkin. Meryn shushed him.
“You will die,” Slaith continued. His eyes never blinked. “You will die
soon. You are beginning to die already. A hundred thousand agonies will
carry you to your graves. Your death-screams will shake the Golden Throne
and wake that rancid old puppet you claim to serve. I will cut your flesh and
make you swear the Blood Pact. I will burn your hearts on the altar of Chaos.
I will send your souls to the warp where my lord, the Blood God, mighty
Khorne, will remake you in his image. His alchemy will reforge your souls in
the beauty of eternal darkness, where His Pain will be yours forever.”
At the mention of the forbidden name, Larkin felt his senses sway. He grew
feverishly hot He saw that the others had all gone pale. Kersherin was
gulping hard, trying not to vomit.
“Give up your futile mission now, and I will grant you the mercy of a quick
death. You have an hour.” Slaith glanced away, as if talking to someone offcamera,
and then looked back. “Slaves, dwellers in this place, hear me now.
Search your habitats, your workplaces, your storehouses. Search your cellars
and attics, your granaries and pantries. Find the uninvited Imperial vermin. It
is your duty. Any amongst you I find to have aided them or sheltered them
will suffer at my hands, and their lath and kin besides. Those that come
forward to give up the Imperial vermin will be blessed in my eyes. Their
rewards will be the greatest I can bestow. They will be honoured as my own
blood kindred, for they will have shown true loyalty to my lord the Blood
God.”
The screen view suddenly jolted and panned around, refocusing. The
Ghosts caught a glimpse of a finely appointed chamber, backed by vast
windows that looked out on a ruined statue. Then Slaith’s fur-wrapped back
filled the screen, the viewer following him across the chamber. He moved
aside. The image blurred and refocused again.
The men of Larisel 2 caught their breaths.
Three bodies lay twisted on the floor under one of the windows. Two
were unmistakably wearing Tanith uniform and unmistakably dead. Vast,
ruinous wounds rendered them unrecognisable. Blood soaked the carpet
under them. Sprawled across them was a mutilated man, naked except for
Phantine-issue combat pants. He also looked dead, but he winced and
writhed as Slaith slapped him with a steel-shod fist.
It was Cardinale. His face was a torn mask of blood. His wrists and
ankles were bound with razor-wire. “Sacred feth,” said Meryn.
“See how I know you are here, Imperial vermin. Your fellows are already
discovered and broken. Your cause is lost.”
Slaith looked back at the screen. “One hour,” he said and the picture went
dead.
The screen fuzzed and rolled for a long while. They all jumped as another
preacher suddenly appeared, howling out a stream of profanities.
Larkin’s hands were shaking badly. His mouth was dry.
“They got Larisel 3,” Meryn said.
“Those bodies? Milo? Doyl?” Kuren asked quietly.
Mkvenner shrugged. “Maybe. Maybe one of them was Adare.”
“So some of team 3 might have got clear?” Kuren pressed hopefully.
“Unless there wasn’t enough left of the others to find,” said Mkvenner.
“I can’t sleep now,” said Meryn. “Not after that. Let’s just get on. Let’s
find that bastard. Okay?”
Kersherin and Mkvenner nodded. “Yeah,” Kuren agreed, his head bowed.
“Larkin? Okay with you?”
Larkin looked up at Meryn. “Yes. Let’s get on with it.”
The stacks of Ouranberg’s waste gas burners lay out to the north and west of
the city, built up on slender crags of rock.
Heavy pipelines carried by vast trestle frames of ironwork girders, some
over four kilometres long, linked them to the main city structure. The burners
themselves were fat kiln-like brick chimneys twenty metres in diameter,
capped with blackened-metal ignition frames.
It was mid-morning on the 224th. The sky was a blinding bowl of topaz
altostratus and the morning pollution banks welling up from the Scald were
dissolving into yellowish vapours as the headwind gathered force. Ominous
clouds gathered in the western distances.
Ouranberg was three kilometres away at the end of a vast span of rusty
girderwork. The dry was still immense. Sunlight flared and glinted off its
ribbons of windows. Thin black smoke, like smudged thumbprints, rose from
the domes.
Out of breath from the last stint of climbing, he sat back on a thin ledge of
rock about fifty metres from the top of the stack, one boot braced to stop the
wind sweeping him off. The burner high above him hummed as the wind
blew through the cavities of its burner brackets and every ten minutes or so
there was a gigantic whoosh as gas ignited and blistered up into the sky.
Cinders floated down like snowflakes.
His air bottle had long since been spent, and he was forced to use the
helmet’s rudimentary rebreather That meant every lungful came in moist and
warm, and it was impossible to breathe deeply. This was a climb that would
have been hard even in clean air conditions. He’d sweated off about two
kilos already. His head ached from oxygen starvation. His hands and knees
and feet, despite gloves, reinforced leggings and boots, were bloody and
raw.
He started to climb again, and managed about ten metres. That put him
almost on a level with the bottom spars of the pipeline’s scaffold. He lifted
his visor quickly to suck water from his flask, and then lowered it. The
temptation to inhale the cold air outside was almost overwhelming.
He clambered to the edge of the scaffolding. It had looked slender from a
distance, but now he was up close, he appreciated the titanic scale of the Ibeams
and girder spars. Climbing it wouldn’t be easy. The spars were far too
wide apart. He would have to belly along the girders, hand over hand.
And reach Ouranberg sometime next century.
The alternative was to keep climbing and cross the bridge along the
pipeline. That meant going vertically up the increasingly sheer rock stack for
another forty metres or so.
He tested the tension on the rope that played out beneath him. There wasn’t
much give, so he spent ten minutes hoisting the kit up to his level. Climbing
with full kit on would have been out of the question. He’d been forced to lash
it together and drag it up after him every rime he reached the limit of the
rope. If only his jump-pack hadn’t been crippled in the drop. He keyed his
micro-bead and tried another call.
“Larisel, Larisel, do you read?”
Nothing.
“Larisel, Larisel, over.”
Still nothing. He knew he was well out of range but still he couldn’t resist
trying every now and then. “Larisel, larisel… this is Mkoll. Do you read? Do
you read?”
THREE
They were on the countdown for the invasion now. O-Day. Operation
Thunderhead. Just over a day away.
Gaunt and Rawne joined Lord General Van Voytz and the officers of the
Urdeshi and the Phantine to review the mustered ranks of the Krassian Sixth.
They were a newly founded regiment, out of the recently liberated agri-world
Krassia in the Rimward Marginals. Two thousand men in copper-coloured
battledress and grey shakos. Their commanding officer, Colonel Dalglesh,
was a PDF veteran with beetle brows and a spectacular handlebar
moustache.
“A fine bunch of men, colonel,” Gaunt told him at the end of the inspection.
“Thank you, sir,” Dalglesh said, appearing to be genuinely pleased. “May I
say, it is an honour to be serving with you.”
Gaunt raised an eyebrow.
“Truly, sir,” Dalglesh said. “The reputation of the Tanith First is
considerable. Krassia was settled thanks to the Martyr’s crusade. Your work
in her name on Hagia Shrineworld is regarded with great esteem amongst my
people.”
“Thank you,” said Gaunt. “It’s always nice to be appreciated.”
“It’s always novel to be appreciated,” Rawne murmured behind him.
Gaunt’s micro-bead trilled.
“Excuse me, colonel… Gaunt, go ahead?”
“Colonel-commissar, it’s Curth. You’d better get up to the infirmary.”
Ana Curth set down the vox-mic and hurried back down the corridor to the
intensive ward. She pushed her way through the crowd of orderlies, nurses
and walking wounded that had gathered in the doorway.
Dorden looked round at her. “Did you reach him?”
“He’s on his way now.”
Dorden turned back into the room. “Did you find him like this?”
She shook her head. “I found his bed empty. He’d pulled the drips out. We
started to search for him and Lesp found him in here.”
Dorden took a step towards the cot where Corbec lay half curled in a
sleep that the doctor doubted he would ever wake from.
Agun Soric, naked except for a sheet and the heavy wrap of bandages
around his bulky torso, was sitting on a stool next to the colonel’s cot, his
head on Corbec’s chest. His skin was dimpled with blood-blisters where the
drips had been attached, and with the puckered white marks left by the
adhesive tape that had held them in place.
Soric raised his head as Dorden approached, and slowly lifted the
laspistol so that it was aimed at Dorden’s belly.
“Not another step.”
“Hey now, Agun. Easy. Calm yourself.”
Soric’s one good eye was bleary. He’d been unconscious for many days.
Given the extent of his chest wound, Dorden wasn’t sure how he was
managing to remain alive divorced from the life support apparatus.
“Doc,” he murmured, as if he was recognising Dorden for the first time.
“It’s me, Agun. What’s with the weapon?”
Soric looked at the laspistol as if he was surprised to find himself holding
it. Then some realisation crossed his face.
“Daemons,” he hissed. “Daemons?”
“All around. All around in the air. I had a dream. They’re coming to take
Colm. Coming for him. I dreamt it. They’re coming for him. In his
bloodstream, chewing like rats. Nnh! Nnh! Nnh!” Soric made a graphic
gnawing sound.
“And you’re going to fight them, Agun? With the gun?”
“If I gakking well have to!” Soric said. He swung his head round
awkwardly and focused on Corbec. “He’s not ready to die. It’s not his time.”
Dorden hesitated. He remembered, with an unnerving clarity, Sergeant
Varl saying the same thing.
“No, he’s not ready, Agun,” Dorden agreed.
“I know. I dreamt it. But the daemon rats. They don’t know. They’re
chewing at him.” Soric made the gnawing sound again, and then coughed.
“I’d shoot them if I could,” he added.
“Where the hell did he get a weapon?” murmured someone in the huddle of
onlookers.
“Who’s that?” demanded Soric loudly, looking up alertly and raising the
gun. “Daemons? More daemons? I dreamt about daemons!”
“No daemons, Agun! No daemons!” placated Dorden.
“Get them out of here,” he hissed at Curth.
“Move! Now!” Curth ordered, herding the bystanders out. She drew the
screen behind them and looked back at Dorden.
“How is he still alive?” she whispered.
“Because I’m a tough old bastard, lovely Surgeon Curth,” Soric answered.
“Vervun Smeltery One, man and boy, ahh. Hardens you up, it does, smeltery
work. She’s a lovely girl, isn’t she, doc? A lovely, lovely girl.”
“I’ve always thought so,” Dorden said calmly. “Why don’t you give me the
laspistol, Agun? Maybe I can shoot these daemon rats?”
“Oh no!” Soric said. “That wouldn’t be fair on you, doc. You don’t use
guns. Always admired that in you. Life-saver. Not a life-taker.”
“Why don’t I take it then, Agun?” Curth asked gently. “Back in basic PDF
training, I was top of my class at small arms. I bet I could nail those rats for
you.”
Soric looked at her. With astonishing deftness, he spun the pistol in his
paw so that the grip was suddenly pointing at her. “Off you go then,” he said.
“Lovely, lovely girl,” he added sidelong to Dorden.
“Oh, I know,” said Dorden, breathing out Curth took the weapon gingerly
and tossed it into a laundry bin.
“Let me look you over,” said Curth.
“No, I’m fine,” said the old Verghastite.
“I just want to check the rats aren’t chewing at you too.”
“Hnnh. Okay.” He coughed again, and Dorden saw the spots of blood that
speckled the cot sheets. Soric seemed to slump a little.
Curth went behind Soric and did a bimanual exam of his torso.
“Feth! He’s respiring on both lungs! How is that possible?”
“Clearly?” asked Dorden, unconvinced.
“No… there’s a fluid mass.” She took out her stethoscope and pressed the
cup to Soric’s back. “But not much. This is amazing.”
“Absolutely,” Dorden whispered.
“Forget me, I’m fine,” said Soric, rousing suddenly and coughing again.
“The dream told me I would be fine. The dream made me fine. Said I had to
be fine so’s I could get up and keep the daemons away from Colm. They want
his soul, doc. They’re chewing in.”
“The dream told you that?”
Soric nodded. “Did I tell you my great grandmother was a witch?”
Curth and Dorden both hesitated. “A witch?” echoed Dorden.
“Had the second sight, most peculiar it was. Earned her keep in the outhabs
for years, telling fortunes.”
“Like… a psyker?” Curth asked.
“Gak me, no!” Soric spluttered. “Lovely, girl, but very foolish, eh, doc?
My dear Ana, if my sainted old grandma had been a psyker, she’d have been
gathered up by the Black Ships, wouldn’t she? Gathered up by the Black
Ships or shot as a heretic. No, no… she was a witch. She had a harmless
knack of seeing the future. In dreams mostly. My old mam said I’d inherit the
talent, being the seventh son of a seventh son, but I’ve not had so much as a
twinge of it me whole life.”
“Until now,” he added.
“You dreamed Corbec had daemons chewing at him?” asked Curth. “Clear
as you like, that’s what the dream said.”
“In his blood?”
“As you say.”
“And the dream said you’d come back to life so you could prevent that?
Prevent the daemons carrying Colm off?”
“Yes, lady.”
Curth looked over at Dorden. “Find Lesp. Have him do a toxicological
spread test on Corbec.”
“You’re kidding,” Dorden said.
“Just find Lesp, Tolin.”
“No need. I can do a tox-spread myself.”
“I had other dreams,” Soric said. His voice was distant now, as if he had
exhausted himself.
“We need to get you back to bed, Agun,” Curth hushed. “The dream will
only heal you if you help it by resting.”
“Okay. Lovely, lovely girl, doc.”
Curth helped Soric to his feet as Dorden stripped sterile wraps off the
instruments he was about to use on Corbec. “Bad dreams,” Soric mumbled.
“I’m sure they were.”
“I saw Doyl. And Adare. They’re dead. Breaks my heart. Both dead. And
the cardinal is in terrible pain.”
“The cardinal?”
“Terrible pain. But tell Gaunt… Mkoll’s not dead.” Curth glanced at
Dorden. She saw the look in his eyes. Torn between hope and dismissal.
“Come on, Agun,” she said.
“Lovely, lovely girl,” Soric mumbled. He sagged and collapsed. “Lesp!
Lesp!” Curth yelled.
By the time Gaunt reached the infirmary, Soric was strapped into a cot and
back on life support. “He said what?”
“He said daemons were after Corbec And that he’d dreamed Doyl and
Adare were dead, but Mkoll was alive. And he said something about the
cardinal being in terrible pain.”
“The who?”
“The cardinal.”
Gaunt stood with Curth in the shadows of a service doorway down the hall
from the intensive bay. Curth was trying to light a lho-stick, her hands
unsteady.
“Give me that,” Gaunt snapped, and plucked the stick from her mouth. He
walked over to a flamer pack that had been dumped amidst a clumsy pile of
kit along the corridor wall by crash crews and lit the thing off a blue pilot
flame from the nozzle.
He crossed back to Curth and handed her the lho-stick.
“Those things will kill you,” he said.
“Better them than the warp,” she replied, sucking hard.
“His actual words were ‘the cardinal’?”
“That’s what I heard.”
“The Phantine specialist assigned to Adare’s team was called Cardinale,”
Gaunt told her. “No crap,” she said simply.
Dorden approached down the hallway and joined them. Without comment
he took the lho-stick from Curth’s hand, took a deep drag, regretted it in a fit
of coughing, and handed it back to her.
“Corbec will live,” he said.
Gaunt smiled. “And Soric?”
“Him too. I dread to think what it would take to bring Agun Soric down.”
“You don’t look happy,” Gaunt noted.
Dorden shrugged. “On Ana’s advice I ran a tox-spread. Corbec was in a
terminal decline thanks to a nosocomial infection.”
“A what?”
“In his injured state, he had picked up a secondary infection here in the
infirmary.”
“Blood poisoning,” said Curth.
“Yes, Ana. Blood poisoning. If I hadn’t shot him up with twenty cc’s of
morphomycin and an anticoagulant, he’d probably have been dead by
nightfall.”
“Damn,” said Gaunt.
“Daemons in his blood stream, chewing like rats,” Curth said, mimicking
Soric’s gnawing sound. “Don’t start with that,” Dorden said. “But you’ve got
to admit—” Curth began. “No, I haven’t,” said Dorden.
The Ghosts in the main billet were packing kits and stripping down weapons
when Hark brought the punishment detail back in. Trooper Cuu was cuffed
and hobbled, and scurried to keep up with the guards. His face was drawn
and pale from too many nights in a cell, and it made his jagged scar all the
more prominent.
“Stand to!” Hark cried, and the detail slammed to a halt.
“Keys!” demanded Hark.
The nearest trooper handed him a fob of geno-keys and the commissar
unlocked Cuu’s restraints.
Cuu stood blinking, rubbing his wrists.
“Do you understand the nature of your transgression and renounce it utterly
before the eyes of the God-Emperor?”
“I do, sir.”
“Do you accept your guilt and understand it as a measure of the God-
Emperor’s forgiveness?”
“I do that sir.”
“Do you promise to stay right out of my damned way, from now on?” Hark
snarled, pushing his face into Cuu’s. “You can count on it”
“Sir?”
“Sir. You can count on it, sir.”
Hark looked away. “Prisoner is dismissed,” he said. The detail turned on
their heels and marched out, Hark behind them.
Cuu crossed to his cot. He sat down and looked along the row at Bragg.
“What?” Bragg said, looking up from the half-oiled firing mechanism he
was stripping down.
“You,” said Cuu.
“Me what?” Bragg asked, getting up. “Let him be, Bragg,” said Fenix. “He
ain’t worth it,” said Lubba.
“No, Cuu wants to say something,” said Bragg. “Cuu, I’m glad Gaunt got
you off. I’m glad it wasn’t you. Made me sick to think someone in our
regiment could do a thing like that.”
“You thought it was me, Bragg. You told them where to look.”
“Yeah,” said Bragg, turning away. “Those coins… that was your fault.”
“And this is yours,” said Cuu, pulling up his tunic so they could see his
narrow back and the bloody welts the lash had made thirty times across his
torso.
FOUR
It was a long way down.
The late afternoon was bringing down a glowering weather pattern: low,
dark nimbostratus swollen with rain and a stiff westerly wind. In sympathy,
the Scald far below was seething up, churning with firestorms and
electrochemical flares.
The driving acid rain was heavy enough to reduce Ouranberg to little more
than a grey blur against the ominous sky. But it did little to reduce the scale of
the yawning gulf beneath him.
Mkoll edged along the top of the pipeline. There was just enough room on
the girders of the support cradle for him to put one foot exactly in front of the
next, steadying himself with one hand against the side of the pipe itself. The
rain was making everything slick: the metal under his feet, the pipe under his
touch. There wasn’t much in the way of anything to actually grasp onto except
the occasional rivet. It was a matter of steady balance and total
concentration.
For the first five hundred metres or so, he’d walked along the top of the
great pipe, but then the weather had deteriorated and the rising wind had
denied him that option. Walking along the edge of the cradle was much
slower going.
He would have preferred not to look down, but it was essential. The
girders were scabbed with rust and sticky lichens, and he had to place each
step carefully. Below him was a sheer drop down into the toxic depths of
Phantine. One slip, one patch of rust or moss, one rain-slick spar, and he
would be falling without hope of survival. Mkoll was pretty sure that if he
fell, he would collide with one of the span’s cross members on the way, so at
least he wouldn’t know much about it.
He’d already had two close shaves. A sudden gust of updraft had nearly
swept him off. And he’d accidentally trodden on one of the vile slug-like
things that dwelt in this dismal place. Thermovores. Bonin and Milo had told
him about them. The thing had squished and his boot had slid right away in
the slime. Too close. Too, too close.
Mkoll figured he was about halfway across. The rain was getting heavier,
sheeting down diagonally, and barks of thunder shook the air. It was almost
twilight, and, apart from a few lights, the city was now utterly invisible.
The rain had brought the slugs out. Mkoll presumed they derived nutrients
from the precipitation, or essential fluids, or maybe fed on micro-algae
dissolved out of the metal by the rain’s high acidity. Feth, he was no
biologist! All he knew for sure was that the metalwork was covered with the
disgusting things, ten times the number that had been there at the start of his
crossing, before the rain. He tried not to touch them and certainly not to tread
on them. The latter was difficult. He had to take long strides regularly to step
over writhing piles of them. Twice, he had to use the stock of his lasrifle to
sweep particularly large masses out of his way.
The skinwing presumably mistook him for a rival predator. Or perhaps it
fancied bigger game. He saw it coming right at the last minute, a scrawny,
attenuated rat-like thing with a ragged, two metre wingspan and a whip-thin
tail four metres long. It flew into his visored face, trilling ultrasonic squeals
frenziedly, and beating its wings at him. Mkoll stumbled, swung at it with a
curse, and slipped off the girder.
He caught the girder edge with his left hand. The impact of arrest nearly
dislocated his shoulder. Mkoll grunted in pain. His legs pinwheeled, trying to
find something to tuck against. As his left fingertips began to slip off, he got
his right hand on the girder too. His first grab came away with a handful of
thermovores. He shook them off his fingers and got a better grip. His legs
were still dangling and his forearms were on fire with the effort of gripping
the spar and supporting his weight.
The skinwing came back, attacking him from behind, shrilling so loud his
steel helmet vibrated. “Get the feth off!” he yelled.
Teeth clenched, grunting, he got one elbow up on the girder, then the other,
then one boot. Finally, he rolled himself up onto the beam and lay, shaking
and choking for breath, face down in a mass of crushed slug-vermin.
He lay there for a long time, trying to slow his racing heart, feeling like he
was going to die.
He finally moved again when the skinwing landed on his shoulder and
started to gnaw at his neck-seal. He jerked round, caught it by the head and
held on tight as it thrashed and fought. He kept his grip on it long enough to
pull out his knife and kill it.
Mkoll dropped it off the edge and watched it tumble away, wings and long
tail trailing, into the depths. Wretched fething thing had nearly killed him.
Just before it vanished into the clouds far below, an indistinct shape, much,
much larger than the skinwing and sleekly black, emerged briefly from the
Scald and took it gracefully in mid-air before vanishing again.
Mkoll had no idea what he had just glimpsed. But he became suddenly
glad it had only been a skinwing that had decided he might make a meal.
He got up, unsteady and aching, wiped the slime off his tunic front, and
resumed his arduous progress.
Nessa placed her hand over Milo’s mouth before she woke him. It seemed
unfair to disturb him. He was profoundly sleeping, like a child, it seemed to
her. But it was getting on for 20.00 Imperial, and the dusk cycle was beginning.
They had to get moving.
Milo woke and looked up at her. She smiled reassuringly and took her
hand away, uncovering an answering smile.
He sat up and rubbed his face with his hands. “You okay?” he whispered.
She didn’t reply. He lowered his hands and repeated the whisper so she
could see his lips. “Yes,” she said. Then added, “Too loud?” She had
difficulty gauging the volume of her own speech.
“That’s fine,” he said.
Sneaking away from the slave gang they had mingled with to cross the
causeway, they had spent the earlier part of the day progressing across the
main mill areas and work yards, avoiding the eagerly searching patrols of the
enemy. In the middle part of the afternoon, weary from effort and the
sustained tension, they had broken into a derelict tenement hab on the
outskirts of Alpha dome to steal a few hours’ rest.
Neither of them had mentioned the terrible events of the causeway
crossing. Milo hadn’t known Doyl well, but he knew the Ghosts had lost a
valuable and gifted scout. Adare’s death affected him on a more direct
emotional level. Lhurn Adare; sharp, confident and strong, had been a wellliked
Tanith and a personal friend. He had been one of Colonel Corbec’s
sacra-drinking cronies, a die-hard carouser who liked to see the dawn come
up with the likes of Varl, Derin, Cown, Domor, Bragg and Brostin. Part of the
inner circle, the heart and backbone of the Tanith First. Milo had seen plenty
of action at Adare’s side, right from the early days. He remembered the
relentless practical jokes Adare had played on Baffels and Cluggan. He
remembered getting fabulously legless with him the night Adare made
sergeant. He remembered Adare’s frequent, sound advice.
Now they were both gone. Adare and Doyl. Dead, Milo was sure. Like all
the others. Baffels, on Hagia. Cluggan, long gone on Voltemand. Mkoll, in the
skies over Ouranberg.
How much longer, Milo wondered, until all the last pieces of Tanith were
worn away?
He got to his feet and stretched, trying to shake off the sadness so his mind
could be sharp. The bare room was lit by a single chemical lamp that Nessa
had dared to ignite because the windows were boarded with sheets of pulpply.
Her long-las was laid out on her camo-cloak, disassembled. She was
using a thimble sewn from vizzy-cloth to polish and oil the firing mechanism.
Milo took out some foil-sealed bag rations and wolfed them down,
swigging water from his flask. He noticed his hands were grimed with dust,
but didn’t care.
He opened the tissue paper schematic of Ouranberg they had all been
issued with and studied it again, plotting routes.
“Did you sleep?” he asked, touching her arm first so she knew to look at
him.
“A little.”
“Enough?”
“I had a dream,” Nessa said as she worked on her sniping piece.
“A dream?” he asked.
“I dreamed Colonel Corbec and Sergeant Soric came to find us. They
were alive.”
“They probably are,” Milo said. “I mean, we don’t know.”
“No, but they were close to dying when we left. It’s one thing to lose
someone in battle. It’s another to leave them dying and then never know…
never find out…”
“We’ll find out. They’ll be waiting for us when we get back. Soric will be
full of jokes and terribly proud of you. Corbec will have a bottle of sacra
open and be demanding I dig out my pipes for a tune or two.”
“Why will Soric be proud of me?” she asked.
“Because you will have put a hot-shot between Slaith’s eyes.”
She laughed. “It’s good to know you have such confidence in me. And that
you can see into the future, Brin.”
“It’s a gift I have.”
She shook her head with a chuckle and started to slide her long-las
together. Her hands worked with economical practice, clicking the
components together. Milo doubted he could have reassembled a lasrifle in
twice the time.
He watched her. She was commonly regarded as the most beautiful woman
in the Ghosts, though the men had their favourites: Muril, Arilla, Banda,
Solia, Elian, Criid and, when they were drunk or in pain enough to actually
dare admit it. Ana Curth. Criid and Banda were thought to be the most
alluring, though it often impressed Milo that Criid was firmly considered out
of bounds even in terms of conversational fantasy because of her tie to
Caffran. Nessa wasn’t sexy in the same way Banda or Solia were. It was
partly her quietness, itself a scar of warfare. But it was mostly her fineboned,
stunning face, the perfect angles of her cheeks and nose and the deep
blue of her eyes. Her streaming, glossy hair had seemed to be a key part of
her appeal. That was gone now, and she was still utterly beautiful. Her hair
was just beginning to grow in again, a fine down-like felt. The lack of hair
emphasised her sculptural features.
Her eyes came up and caught his. “What’s so interesting?” she asked.
Milo shook his head.
He looked away, and saw a small slab of pulp-ply leaning against the
wall. A knife tip had cut the words “Nessa Bourah, 341.748 to 225.771
M41.” into it.
“What the feth is that?” he asked.
“Just a habit,” she replied.
“It’s a fething grave marker!”
“Relax, Brin. We did it every day during the scratch fighting. I never got
out of the habit.”
Milo shook his head, puzzled. “You’ll have to explain more than that,” he
said.
She put down her long-las and faced him. “We were going to die. Every
day, fighting the guerilla war in the ruined out-habs of Vervunhive, we were
going to die. The death rate was awful. So we got into the habit of carving
our own grave markers in what little downtime there was. If we died, you
see, there would be a marker ready. Easy. Simple. A quickly dug slit-trench,
a scatter of earth over the body, a prayer, and a marker ready and waiting.”
“That’s terrible.”
“That’s… the way it was.” She paused and cleared her throat quietly. Then
she continued, “It became routine, and people started putting the next
morning’s date on the markers, as if daring fate to take them. It was a joke at
first. A bad, dark joke. Then someone, I don’t remember who, pointed out
that, as a rule, the fighters who carved the next day’s date as their death date
survived.”
“Survived?”
“The sensible ones who left the death date blank tended to die. Those that
gleefully etched in that the next day would be their last… lived. So they’d
have to scrap the marker and make a new one because the date was wrong.
After a week or two, it became a habit, a lucky charm. We all did it, daring
the gods, or daemons or whatever rules the cosmic order, to make our grave
markers useless.”
“And you still do it?”
She nodded. “At times like this, I do.”
“I feel like I should make one,” he said.
“Only works for Verghastites, I’m afraid,” she said.
“Damn shame…” he grinned.
And froze.
He could hear a knocking, scraping sound from the floor below. Seeing his
look, Nessa got up and loaded a cell magazine into her long-las.
Slowly, listening, Milo lifted his cannon.
More knocking, a crash.
Let’s go, he signed.
They gathered up their kit rapidly, keeping an eye on the door. Nessa
extinguished the lamp.
In the sudden, blue gloom, Milo gestured to the back door with his thumb,
they moved slowly, silently towards it, weapons ready, camo-cloaks draped
around them.
Milo gently pulled back the pulp-ply boarding the nearest window.
Three platoons of Blood Pact were assembling in the square outside.
Another search-patrol. Ever since Adare and Doyl had been discovered,
the enemy had been scouring the mill district for other Imperial interlopers.
The public address system had broadcast imploring appeals to “find the
vermin”, alternating with demands that the “Imperial scum” give themselves
up.
Milo and Nessa backed to the rear door. They were expecting Blood Part.
But it wasn’t.
The hab-room door splintered in, exploded by some powerful shotgun
blast, and the first loxatl scurried through.
In the half-light, Milo got a glimpse of a sinuous, grey body with a flat,
snouted head and a short, muscular tail. It came in and went up the wall,
dewclaws ripped into the plaster to gather purchase. An augmetic limb-frame
snapped around its mottled belly tracked around the pepper-pot nose of an
alien scattergun.
A second loxad slithered in through the door and clawed its way rapidly
up the other wall. Milo could smell spearmint mixed with sour milk.
Its bionic weapon-frame clicked around, sweeping the room. It aimed at
Milo, shooting out a dull green aiming light that splashed on his cloak.
Nessa’s long-las roared.
The second alien mercenary was ripped off the wall by the hot-shot and
smashed, convulsing, into the doorframe.
The other one fired its weapon. A huge hole was chewed out of the
pressed-fibre panelling beside Milo.
He opened fire, lurched back for a moment by the U90’s almost
unmanageable recoil.
The hi-ex AP rounds blew the lizard thing apart and hosed the wall with
its unwholesome blood.
Its smoking carcass fell off the wall and slammed onto the floor.
“Feth!” he heard Nessa scream. The creature she had shot was lurching up
again, sweeping its flechette blaster towards Milo.
Milo emptied the rest of the drum mag into the second loxad, pulping its
head and chest. He looked round at Nessa.
Come on! he signed. She nodded and pulled him towards the doorway the
loxatl had come through. Trusting her, Milo realised she was right. The
Blood Pact squads were storming up the rear of the hab, intending to pick off
any fleeing stragglers the loxad had missed.
No one was expecting anybody to exit from the front of the building.
Nessa and Milo, hand in hand, raced out of the hab tenement, and sprinted
away towards the forbidding shells of residence blocks on the far side of the
square.
In the hab behind them, Nessa’s grave marker lay crushed under the bulk of
a dead loxatl.
They’d had to wait the best part of the day for a chance to sneak back to the
air wharf, where it took them just ninety seconds to commandeer the carrier.
Banda’s long-shot took out the driver, and Bonin and Varl did the rest with
warknives.
Jagdea ran forward across the air wharf and heaved the driver’s corpse
out of its seat.
“Do we leave them here?” Unterrio asked, nodding at the dead bodies.
“No, get them aboard,” said Vadim.
They hefted up the heretics’ corpses and threw them on to the carrier’s
cargo bed.
It was a light hauler, with a roofed cabin section and a tarp-covered
payload bay. Jagdea got behind the controls as the rest of Larisel 1 finished
lugging the dead onto the vehicle’s bay and climbed aboard.
“Commander?” Varl prompted.
“Just familiarising myself with the layout,” she said.
Expertly, Jagdea launched them, and they flew down a canyon of habs
towards the porta of Alpha dome.
At just about the same time, far to the north-west, Mkoll was scaling the
granite outcrop where the pipeline finally joined Ouranberg. It was dark,
freezing cold, and the wind was fearful, but he felt triumphant. He had made
it all the way across. Now all he had to do was get inside.
Convoys of transport vehicles loaded with munitions for Alpha dome’s air
defences had been rumbling down the access routes non-stop for over an
hour. Larisel 2 had been forced into hiding until the activity died down. They
waited, with nervy impatience, in the basement of a burned-out Ministorum
chapel.
Kuren watched the door, armed with Meryn’s U90. In the course of the day
they’d seen plenty of the vile loxad mercenaries accompanying the Blood
Pact patrols.
“This remind you of anything?” Mkvenner said. He’d been searching
through the broken litter that covered the basement floor, and now held up a
cheap plaster figurine, one of a dozen he’d found in a box.
“It’s a memento of Saint Phidolas, who led the first settlers to Phantine,”
said Kersherin. “Every church on the planet sells cheap souvenirs like it. For
the pilgrims.”
“Yeah,” said Mkvenner, “but what else?”
“I don’t know…” said Kersherin.
Mkvenner casually smacked the figurine against a pillar, smashing off its
head and upper body. “How about now?”
They all looked at it, like it was a joke and they were ready for the
punchline. “Feth,” said Larkin suddenly. “It was behind Slaith.”
“Right,” said Mkvenner.
“What?” Meryn snapped. “Behind Slaith? What are you talking about?”
“When he was on the screen,” said Larkin, “when he… he showed us
Cardinale… there was a big window behind him and a ruined statue
outside.”
“I don’t remember any statue,” Kuren said.
“There was a statue,” said Mkvenner. “Ruined. Right outside his
windows.”
The scout turned the broken figurine over and examined a label on the
bottom.
“An image of Saint Phidolas,” he read, “copied from the great statue that
may be seen in the Imperial concourse, Alpha dome, Ouranberg.”
“Well, well, well…” Meryn chuckled.
“I don’t like the look of this,” Jagdea said.
“Keep going,” Bonin told her. He was riding next to her in the hauler’s
cab.
They had got through the porta into Alpha dome with remarkable ease, and
joined an access route that had seemed busy enough for them to blend in. Varl
hoped they might get as far as the dome’s core districts by midnight.
But the traffic was slowing, and armoured Blood Part air-speeders with
rotating orange lamps were forcing all vehicles down to road level so that
they could be channelled through a check station.
“We need to get off this route,” said Jagdea. They were barely crawling,
following the tail of a large munitions truck.
“They’ll see us if we try and break away. Besides, the route has no
obvious intersections.”
“Well, I don’t think going through that checkpoint is going to be an
especially healthy idea!” she hissed.
“Sarge?” Bonin called back through the mesh partition to Varl. “Any
stunningly good suggestions from you?”
Varl peered down the line of near stationary traffic ahead and behind them.
The six-lane route itself was open, with little cover, and thirty storey
tenements rose on either side. Not the place for a firefight.
He cursed himself. Using the hauler had been a smart idea, and it had
saved them a lot of time. But Jagdea and Bonin had advised him to ditch it
once they were inside Alpha dome. Varl had wanted to press on, to see how
far they could get. He felt stupid now, like he’d let them down. Even though
Gol Kolea was nowhere around, the Kolea-Varl devil-dare rivalry had
landed them in this fix. Gol had been the hero at Cirenholm. Shutting down
the power plant like that had effectively won the battle for them. He’d
triumphed that round. When Operation Larisel came up, all Varl had been
able to think of was that this might be his turn. His turn to be the hero. Devildare,
Kolea! How d’you like that?
So he’d pushed them on, far further than they should ever have gone out in
the open like this. He had pushed them so they would reach Slaith and be
heroes. “Stupid” didn’t even begin to cover it.
“There’s a road to the left, about seventy metres up,” Varl said through the
mesh.
“I see it,” said Jagdea dubiously.
“We keep rolling forward like this, up to the checkpoint, and then break
left fast and exit.”
“Just like that?”
“Commander, I have absolute faith in your ability to drive this thing like it
was a Lightning on afterburner. We get down there, ditch this cart and go to
ground.”
“That’s your plan?” asked Unterrio.
“Yes, it fething is,” said Varl. “We all clear?”
“What happens if they rumble us before we reach the turn?” asked Jagdea.
“Okay…” Varl said. “We pull out of the queue anyway. Fly straight at the
tenement.”
“What?”
“I’ve got hi-ex loaded. I’ll make a hole. We’ll get inside the building and
then ditch and cover there. Okay? Clear?”
The traffic line crept forward. The air was thick with exhaust fumes and
the sound of dozens of engines. An air-speeder droned by overhead, flying
down the queue.
Incomprehensible instructions boomed out of an amplifier at the
checkpoint.
“Foot troops!” Bonin whispered sharply.
“Where?” asked Varl.
“Walking down the line towards us. On the median strip. There, by the
crash barrier.”
“Oh feth.”
“They’re checking papers,” Jagdea said. She tugged off her gloves, wiped
her sweating hands dry on her jacket, and then gripped the wheel and the
throttle lever again, tensed and ready.
“Wait for it. Wait for it,” Varl said. Banda, Vadim and Unterrio raised their
weapons to their shoulders. Bonin put his laspistol on his lap.
“They may not come down this far,” Banda whispered hopefully.
The vehicles moved forward again, another few metres. A Blood Pact
officer, standing on the route’s central barrier, waved the three trucks
immediately in front of them on with a torch stick.
Then he stepped out into their path and held up a hand. “Shit!” said Jagdea.
Four more Blood Pact troopers and a slaver with a team of hate-dogs
approached behind the officer. He walked towards the hauler.
“We’re blown,” announced Bonin.
“I know!” said Varl. “Wait to the last possible moment…”
The officer stepped up to the cab and peered in. They could smell his body
odour and see his blood-shot eyes through the slits of his iron mask. He
began to ask something in a language they didn’t understand and then stopped
as he saw Bonin and Jagdea and their Imperial combat gear.
“Go!” said Bonin, and shot the officer through the head with his pistol.
Jagdea threw the hauler out of the line, engaging the throttle so hard that
Unterrio was thrown off his feet in the back. The air-truck screamed across
the route towards the tenements as shouts, sirens and shots rang out after it.
Heavy fire from an air-speeder stitched plumes of debris from the road
surface as it tried to track them.
“Varl!” Jagdea screamed. The front of the tenement was approaching very
fast. Varl threw back the tarp and stood up so he could fire over the roof of the
cab. He had to fight to stay upright. They were going to hit the wall in scant
seconds.
He fired the U90 and created a rippling blister of overlapping explosions
that blew the ground floor facade in.
They went through the hole.
Almost.
Varl had barely ducked in again when an overhang of brick caught the tarp
of the speeding machine and ripped the entire cover frame off. That tipped
the nose up and spun the back end out. The left rear engine mount sheared off
against an exposed metal beam and a considerable portion of the hauler’s
underside shredded away.
The tenement’s ground floor was one great, open space used for storage
and presently empty, except for the metre square rockcrete pillars every thirty
paces.
The stricken machine flew into the store-space almost sidelong. It hit the
floor once with boneshaking force, bounced up under its own headlong
momentum, and then impacted again, shrieking along the floor in an
astonishing wake of sparks and fragmenting metal.
It hit the first pillar head-on with enough force to spin it off the ground and
leave it crumpled and smoking, facing the way it had come.
Varl and Banda had both been thrown clear and lay unconscious on the
ground nearby. Unterrio got to his feet and tried to get Vadim up. The young
Verghastite had struck his head and was out cold.
“Come on! Come on!” Unterrio screamed.
Bonin came round. He was hanging out of the shattered cab section. It took
him a moment to work out what was going on. He could hear Unterrio
shouting.
Jagdea, saved by her harness belt, was alive but semi conscious. Bonin
fought with her harness and began to drag her out.
Powerful searchlights lanced in through the street windows and the hole.
Silhouetted against them, figures were surging in.
Unterrio leapt out of the carrier and opened fire with his lascarbine.
“Bonin! Get them clear! Get them clear!” he was shouting.
Bonin tried to work out how he could get four semi conscious people clear
of anything. Banda was coming round, weeping with rage and pain, clutching
a broken wrist.
Jagdea suddenly opened her eyes and looked up at Bonin with distant
confusion. “I keep crashing things,” she said weakly. “I don’t like it.”
“Jagdea!”
She began to pass out again, and murmured. “I smell… milk. Bonin, I
smell milk and mint…”
A flechette blaster roared and Unterrio’s defiant stand came to a sudden,
explosive end.
Something small and hard and metallic landed near to Bonin and came
skittering to rest.
For a second, he thought it was a grenade, but then he realised it was a
synapse mine.
“Run!” he howled, though he was pretty sure no one was in any state to
obey.
The mine went off with a silent flash, like a falling star, that flared for a
moment, bright and then went out.
And as he collapsed, paralysed, Bonin knew that his own lucky star had
finally gone out too.
FIVE
It was midnight on the 225th. The massed forces of Operation Thunderhead
were beginning to leave Cirenholm, streaming in convoy out into the night,
heading for Ouranberg.
The vast bomber waves went out first with their interceptor escorts. It was
a clear night, and up in the cockpits of the Magogs, it seemed to the aircrews
like they were part of new constellations issuing from the city.
The drogues that would convey the main army forces began to depart,
sliding up into the cold night air in the wake of the bombers, rotor blades
chopping. Thunderbolt escorts cruised in beside them. The drogues Zephyr,
Aeolus and Trenchant, heavy with Krassian and Urdeshi infantry regiments,
headed out on a long path that would eventually turn them west to assault the
main airwharfs and drome structure of Ouranberg.
The Ghosts were boarding the Nimbus, which, as part of a pack of six
drogues, would convey the main assault force of Tanith, Phantine and Urdeshi
to the southern face of Ouranberg.
O-Day. By dawn the next day, all hell would be unleashed.
Gaunt checked his despatch orders for a final time, signed them, and
handed them to Beltayn, who hurried them off to Van Voytz. Rawne, Daur,
Hark and the other senior officers waited for him outside the office. He rose,
put on his cap, and led the Tanith commanders onto the main troop deck. No
word had yet come from any Larisel group. He wondered how many of them
might still be alive.
On the massive troop deck, thousands of battle-ready Ghosts were being
conducted in prayer by ayatani Zweil.
Zweil saw the officers approach, and finished his reading from The
Gospel of Saint Sabbat. He closed the old book and smoothed his robes.
“Let me say this, finally,” he projected, loud and effortless. “To you all, so
you know it and keep it in your minds through the danger that faces you. And
let me say it now, before he does.” Zweil indicated Gaunt with a casual
thumb and laughter rippled through the ranks. “The Emperor protects. Know
that, remember that, and he will.”
Zweil turned to Gaunt. “All yours,” he said. He made the sign of the aquila
and blessed Gaunt with a few words, and then went down the line of officers,
repeating the same.
“It appears the venerable father has stolen my line,” Gaunt said, facing the
Ghosts. There was more laughter. “So let me tell you this. Colonel Corbec
and Sergeant Soric are both out of danger.”
A considerable cheer went up. Gaunt raised a hand. “They are expected to
make good recoveries. So remember this. I’d like the first news they hear
from their infirmary beds to be word that Ouranberg has fallen and that the
Ghosts have acquitted themselves bravely. That sort of news will heal them
faster than any drug Doc Dorden or Surgeon Curth can give them. What do
you say?”
The cheers were deafening.
“Men of Tanith, men of Verghast—”
“And women!” Criid shouted.
Gaunt smiled. “And women. I often ask you if you want to live forever. I
won’t tonight. I expect to see you all again this time tomorrow, raising the
standard of the Tanith First above Ouranberg. Death is not an option. Fight
hard and give the God-Emperor of Mankind the victory he asks of you all.”
Almost drowned out by the applause and the shouting, Gaunt turned to
Hark.
“Viktor? Inform the admiral we’re ready to cast off.”
This time, the medics were going in with the troop assault. Curth’s medi-pack
was fully prepped, but she was struggling with the body armour Gaunt had
issued.
“You’ve got the buckles misaligned,” said Kolea, coming into the drogue’s
hospital behind her.
“Really?” she said sourly, looking like a patient half-escaped from a strait
jacket.
“Here, let me,” he said, stepping forward to fit her armour properly.
“Shouldn’t you be on the troop decks?” she asked. “Yes. But I had to see
you first. I have a favour to ask.”
“Go on then.”
“How’s that?” he said stepping back. She flexed her arms and patted the
plated front of her armour vest. “Excellent. Thank you. Now what’s this
favour?”
“You know I promised to tell Criid and Caffran about…”
“Yes.”
“That I’d do it after Ouranberg was done.”
“Yes.”
“And you know I’m not looking for that reunion round.”
“Yes, I do. Come on.”
“I don’t think I’m going to be coming back from Ouranberg,” he said.
She gazed at his face. It was unreadable. “What?”
“Listen to me, I’m not looking to find death, but I think it might be looking
for me now. It’s let me off too many times recently. I’m not saying I’m going
to do something foolhardy, but it’s a feeling I have. Now I’ve made up my
mind to tell Criid, I think death might be hoping to cheat me.”
“Feth, aren’t you the fatalist?” She gripped him by the shoulders firmly and
looked up into his eyes. “You are not going to die, Gol. You are not going to
let death take you.”
“I’ll do my best But I have this feeling. This feeling Gol Kolea’s not going
to come back from Ouranberg. You’ve been gakking good to me, Ana. I have
this last favour to ask.”
He took a sealed letter out of his tunic pocket and handed it to her. “If I
don’t come back, give this to Criid. It’s all there. Everything.”
She looked at the letter. “And if you do?”
“Burn it. I’ll be able to tell her and Caffran what was in that letter myself.”
“Okay,” she said, and slid the letter into her fatigue’s pocket.
“Thanks,” he said simply.
She rose up on tip-toe, put a hand behind his neck to pull him lower and
kissed his cheek softly. “Come back, Gol,” she said. “Make me burn it.”
In Ouranberg, drums were beating. Long range auspex had detected the mass
formations of air machines moving out from Cirenholm, and the Blood Pact
was preparing for war. There was a sense of relief, that the hour had finally
come. The preachers on the address-systems spouted their last blasphemies
and then fell silent.
The address screens fizzled with white noise.
The invasion was coming.
On Alpha dome’s Imperial concourse, a fifty acre rockcrete plaza in front of
the central administratum palace, thousands of can-fires had been lit and the
standard of the Blood Pact raised alongside the disturbing, semi-sentient
fronds of algae the loxatl used as banners.
A rotund bronze cauldron, three metres across, had been set at the top of
the palace steps, under the flags, below the desecrated statue of Saint
Phidolas. Devotees of the warp-cult. Blood Pact troops and confused citizens
were spilling into the concourse from all sides.
Blood Pact slavers led the prisoners out. There were fifty of them, all
chained together, all beaten down and despairing. They were whipped to the
base of the steps and ordered to sit.
Larisel 1 was amongst them. Bonin was chained up next to Jagdea, his
head still swimming from the effects of the numbing synapse mine. She
looked like she might pass out any minute.
Bonin could see Varl three rows away, and Vadim, both sullen and dazed.
A little searching found Banda. The chains were chafing at her snapped wrist
and she was ashen with pain.
Bonin and Jagdea were in the front row of the prisoners. At the head of
their chain was Cardinale. Bonin barely recognised the Phantine specialist.
Cardinale was very close to death.
The other prisoners were Imperial servants, captured aircrew or
Ouranberg nobility.
Jagdea was staring at a man in the row opposite them. He was dressed in
ragged Phantine flight-crew uniform, and his shoulder and neck were
blotched with dried blood and signs of pollution bums.
“Viltry?” she said.
“Commander Jagdea?” he mumbled, looking up askance.
“God! I thought you were dead! What happened?”
“Lost my bird over the Southern Scald, thought I was wind-waste… then
one of Slaith’s supply ships picked me up.”
“Golden Throne!” she said. “It’s good to see you!”
Viltry laughed darkly. “Here? I don’t think so.”
“We’re not dead yet, Viltry,” Jagdea said. “Someone once told me that
death comes when it comes and only a fool would bring it early.”
“What kind of simple-minded crap is that?” Viltry said.
Jagdea looked across at Bonin and smiled. A weary smile, but not a
defeated one. “The best kind, I believe. All I’m saying is that it’s only over
when it’s over.”
“Oh, for us, it’s over,” Viltry said sourly. He gestured at the bronze
cauldron.
“What is this about?” Bonin asked him.
“The invasion must be coming,” Viltry said. “Slaith intends to
symbolically renew his blood pact with Urlock Gaur so he can be strong
when he meets the Imperial assault. We’re the sacrifice. That cauldron…
we’re supposed to fill it. With our blood. Slaith will help, of course.”
“Feth…” murmured Bonin. “I wondered why he hadn’t killed us yet.” He
looked at the huge bronze bowl. It was going to take an awful lot of blood to
fill it.
Fifty prisoners, five litres each. That should do it.
The ceremony began. Hundreds of Blood Pact warriors and dozens of loxad
flooded down the steps from the palace, passing the plinth of the shattered
statue of Saint Phidolas, and stood aside as Sagittar Slaith descended.
They were beating their scarred fists against their weapons, and the
clamour raised thundering applause from the gathered audience of thousands.
Slaith, magnificent in his armour and white fur, kissed the side of the
bronze cauldron, and lifted the glinting, ritual adze.
Blood Pact troopers dragged Cardinale up the steps, pulling the chain of
prisoners after him. Bonin and Jagdea found themselves yanked along closer
to the foot of the steps.
Slaith raised the adze and bellowed arcane words. Cardinale was draped
over the edge of the cauldron and held down by two slavers.
“Before he lops Cardinale, if you wouldn’t mind,” Meryn hissed in Larkin’s
ear.
“Shut up and let me concentrate,” Larkin said. From the roof of the
Ouranberg stock exchange, he had a perfect view over the Imperial
concourse. There was zero wind, but the range was long. Larkin adjusted his
sights, and wished he had been given the opportunity for a test round.
“Come on, Larks, you can do it,” Kuren said.
“I’d shut up, if I were you,” Larkin heard Mkvenner say. “He’s doing his
thing.”
Below, Slaith declaimed something else and quickly raised the adze over
Cardinale’s exposed nape.
“Larks!” Meryn urged.
A hot-shot round sang out over the concourse and smashed into Slaith.
“Feth!” said Larkin. “That wasn’t me!”
Mkvenner looked up. Pandemonium had instantly overtaken the crowd
below, and the Blood Pact were surging towards the eastern side of the
concourse.
“It came from over there,” Mkvenner said, pointing to the Munitorium
blocks that flanked the east edge of the square.
Larkin trained his long-las again, staring through the scope. He saw Slaith
getting back to his feet beside the cauldron.
“Feth! He’s got a personal shield!” Larkin said.
“Hit him anyway!” Meryn demanded.
Larkin fired, and Slaith was slammed over onto his back. At the same
moment, a second hot-shot stabbed in from the Munitorium and dipped the
edge of the cauldron. Then a third hit Slaith on the ground.
“Now we’re in trouble,” Kersherin said.
Blood Pact and loxad were tearing through the crowd towards the foot of
the stock exchange.
Larkin fired again, hitting Slaith cleanly. But the warlord got up, assisted
by his men. His personal shield had held.
“He’s las-proof,” Larkin said.
“I suggest we get out of here,” said Meryn.
“No,” said Larkin, taking aim again. “Wait…”
On the top floor of the Munitorium block, Nessa fell back from the window
and looked at Milo.
“He’s shielded! I hit him twice!”
“Okay, let’s go. We did what we could.”
They ran to the exit door. Milo could hear boots thundering up the stairs
towards them.
Mass panic had overtaken the square. People were fleeing everywhere.
Bonin looked round at Jagdea and started to say something when he was
lurched back by a powerful jerk on the chain. A pin-point las-round of
extraordinary accuracy had severed the chain between them.
Bonin leapt to his feet and threw himself on the nearest Blood Pact guard,
choking him with the dangling end of the slave-chain. As the red-dad warrior
collapsed, Bonin grabbed his weapon.
It was a standard las. Good enough. Bonin gunned down three Blood Pact
who ran towards him and then started firing at the enemy troops on the steps.
Jagdea struggled forward and grabbed another of the fallen enemy weapons.
She started to shoot away the chains confining the other prisoners.
“Death comes when it comes and only a fool would bring it early, eh?”
Bonin yelled at her. “What idiot told you that?”
“We get out of this mess alive, Bonin,” she shouted back, “and I’ll tell
you!”
“And believe me,” she added, shooting a charging slaver through the head
and shattering his iron visor. “I intend to get out of this alive if it’s the last
thing I do.”
Bonin laughed aloud, and drove the fight towards the bewildered enemy.
Flanked by a bodyguard of three Blood Pact officers and two loxatl, Sagittar
Slaith hurried back into the palace. He was cursing and swearing, bruised
and shaken by the savage hits his personal shield had taken.
As he stormed back into his private apartment, the floor began to shake. It
was nearly dawn and overhead the first waves of bombers had reached
Ouranberg. Slaith turned slowly to his officers, smouldering with his
infamous rage. The Blood Pact shook behind their iron grotesques, and even
the xenos warriors closed their nictating han lids. Slaith opened his mouth,
but it was not his fury that hit them.
A rain of shots from a lasrifle on full auto killed the Blood Pact officers
instantly and exploded harmlessly off Slaith’s screen and the reflective hides
of the two loxad.
There was a human standing in the rear doorway of the room. An Imperial
soldier half-shrouded in a ragged camo-cape, his lasrifle aimed at them.
“Where the hell did you come from?” Slaith raged.
“Tanith,” said Mkoll, and fired again.
Slaith walked forward through the blasts unharmed, the flinching loxad at
his side, double-lids shut against the las-shots, armature cycling up their
flechette cannons.
“A lasgun?” said Slaith. “I’m shielded and the loxatl soak up las-fire.
You’re out of luck. You should have been better prepared.”
“Oh, this is just a distraction,” said Mkoll, gesturing with his lasrifle. “The
real surprise is under that table.”
The loxad flechette guns spat their hails of lethal sub-munitions and
exploded the doorway and the wall around it. Mkoll was already diving
headlong out of sight.
Slaith stooped and peered under the table. What he saw was six tube
charges wired together on a timer. “No!” he screamed. “Nooooooo!”
The detonation took the roof off the state room. Slaith’s personal shield
managed to hold for 1.34
seconds before it was overwhelmed by the blast force. Sagittar Slaith was
still screaming with rage as he vaporised.
SIX
Phantine, with its oceanic skies and tempestuous Scald, was a planet of
storms, but the greatest storm that morning was the human one that engulfed
Ouranberg.
In the pale, violet light of dawn, columns of dense black smoke and
spiralling fireballs crowned the city, and the air streamed with las-fire,
tracer shells and sneaking rockets. Swarms of attack craft, like plagues of
insects, buzzed over the domes through the crackling blossoms of flak.
Raging infernos glowed dull red through ragged holes in the main domes.
Preceded by diving packs of Shrikes, the main force of drogues and troop
barges assaulted the Imperial landing platform and the expanse of Pavia
Fields behind it, setting down thousands of Imperial Guardsmen under
withering fire from the fortifications of Ourangate and the Alpha dome
emplacements. The gun turrets of the barges chattered and flashed as they
hovered in, their gate-ramps crashing down to disgorge charging Troops or
the clanking Chimeras and Manticores of the Urdeshi Seventh Armoured.
The noise was total. A dreadful blur of sound out of which individual
noises could hardly be distinguished. As the ramp of his own barge came
down, Gaunt led his men out with urgent waves of his power sword. They
were never going to hear his voice.
Urdeshi units took the landing platform after a brutal series of firefights
and horrific hand to hand encounters. The Ghosts of Tanith, led to the west by
Major Rawne and to the east by Captain Daur, pincered the Blood Pact
ground forces defending the Avenue of the Polyandrons, and opened the way
to Ourangate itself.
The drogue Skyro, supported by Marauder gunships, manoeuvred in over
Beta dome and roped Phantine and Urdeshi troops down onto the main
vapour mill. A brigade personally led by Major Fazalur took and held the
main mill complex against bitter resistance until Gaunt broke through
Ourangate and moved Tanith and Urdeshi elements to relieve him.
To the east, the secondary assault poured into the city’s main drome. For
about an hour, the fighting there was the most intense and furious of the whole
battle. The Krassians were driven back twice until the resolve of the Blood
Pact finally snapped. After that it was a rout.
The cost was high. Nearly two thousand Imperial Guardsmen were killed,
the majority of them Krassian and Urdeshi. Forty aircraft were lost. The
drogue Aeolus, heroically staying on station to ensure that the Krassian units
could get enough troops down for their third and final push into the dome,
was hammered by Ouranberg’s western batteries and eventually listed,
rudderless and on fire, towards Gamma dome where it foundered and
exploded. The entire crew perished. The colossal explosion shot a vast
doughnut of burning gas up into the air and scorched the west face of Gamma
dome black.
But Imperial victory was pretty much guaranteed from the moment that
word of Slaith’s death began to spread through the enemy forces. The Blood
Pact kept fighting, and in many ways became more savage. They were lost,
and that made them suicidally vengeful.
Slaith’s demise certainly did not rob them of their courage. But their
coordination and discipline were gone. Without Slaith, they were like a
brain-dead body, still twitching with involuntary responses.
Van Voytz had known all along that Ouranberg would be hard to capture,
nigh on impossible, in fact, if he was to keep the vital vapour mills intact. As
fighting raged through the hab-domes of the city, and report after report came
in of losses and casualties, he consoled himself with the knowledge that it
could have been a hundred times worse. His gamble with Operation Larisel
had paid off. If Slaith had still been alive at the start of the assault, chances
were the date 226.771 M41 would have been remembered as a tragic
Imperial defeat.
It didn’t feel like victory on the ground in the streets of Alpha dome. Fierce
fighting continued until well into the evening. Whole hab-blocks were on
fire, and in places the roadways had collapsed through into lower dome
levels.
Gaunt led from the front, directly deploying his units into the heart of the
dome. Squads under Bray, Burone, Theiss and Daur had secured a vital inner
bascule and overrun a string of well-made Blood Pact emplacements. There
were rumours that inside the domes the citizens of Ouranberg were rising up
against their oppressors. Gaunt saw nothing of that, only hundreds of terrified
civilians fleeing the main centres of fighting.
His primary concern was not the overall victory. Van Voytz could worry
about that. As soon as he was within range, he made repeated efforts to
contact the Larisel elements and was heartened to find that some of them at
least were still alive. Beltayn relayed broken transmissions from Meryn’s
team, which had linked up with the survivors from Varl’s Larisel 1 and were
now besieged in the refectory of Ouranberg’s Scholam Progenium near the
Imperial concourse.
Gaunt swore to them he would break through and secure them. He pushed
Rawne’s elements to his left flank, supported by Urdeshi armour, and sent
Haller, Maroy and Ewler’s units to the right.
The right flank approach was hopeless. Maroy reported heavy resistance
in the eastern market area. Rawne fared little better. His forces — the
sections commanded by Kolea, Obel and Mkfin and a brigade of Urdeshi
under young Shenko— ran foul of the loxad and got caught up in a period of
ugly street-fighting that lasted over two hours.
Gaunt himself managed to cut through eventually, leading the platoons of
Domor, Skerral and Mkendrick along with forty-five Urdeshi pioneers and
the units that had, until Cirenholm, been led by Corbec and Soric. These last
two were temporarily commanded by Raglon and Arcuda, and Gaunt kept the
inexperienced leaders close. He needn’t have worried. Arcuda displayed a
tactical gift that made Gaunt wish he’d advanced the man sooner, and Raglon
was as confident and assured as he might have hoped. Raglon had come a
long way from junior vox-carrier.
They broke through a half-defended line of buildings and saw off a loxad
counter-attack with their flamers. Dremmond and Lyse led the flamer repulse
against the vile xenos mercenaries. They had a fantastic resistance to laser
rounds, but fled moaning from the flames. With Nittori from his own platoon
still injured, Gaunt had allowed Lyse to take his role. She was the first
female flame-trooper in the regiment another notable achievement for the
Verghastites.
Just after 14.00 Imperial, Gaunt’s force caught Blood Pact elements on the
Imperial concourse from the side, put them to flight and relieved the besieged
Ghosts in the scholam. Despite the fighting that continued to rattle outside as
the Urdeshi stormed the main palace, Gaunt took the time to greet them all
personally, and thank them for their bravery and determination.
Of the sixteen Ghosts and their four Urdeshi Specialists who had gone in
as Operation Larisel, they appeared to be the only survivors. Banda, with a
shattered wrist Scout-trooper Bonin and Sergeant Varl, both wounded badly
in the mayhem of fighting that had followed Slaith’s death. Vadim, seriously
concussed from the truck crash. Larkin, crying quietly with the pain of the
migraine that had finally conquered him. Mkvenner, Kuren and Sergeant
Meryn, all battered but miraculously intact. Specialist Kersherin, the only
Skyborne who had survived. Commander Jagdea, who praised in particular
Bonin’s efforts to free and protect the captives during the running firefight,
including a pilot named Viltry and Specialist Cardinale.
Cardinale, Gaunt learned, had perished from his terrible wounds during
the siege.
Gaunt called up immediate medicae support for them and tried not to think
about the ones who hadn’t made it. Rilke, Cocoer, Nour, Doyl, Adare Nessa,
Mkoll… Milo.
Fifteen minutes later, Arcuda voxed Gaunt to say his men had found Milo
and Nessa alive on the roof of the Ministry of Vapour Export. Gaunt closed
his eyes. The Emperor protects.
Almost as an afterthought, he turned back to the survivors and asked, “By
the way… who made the shot in the end? Larkin?”
“None of us did,” said Meryn. “Larkin hit the bastard several times, and so
did Nessa I think. But he was shielded.”
“Then how the feth—?”
Gaunt’s unfinished question was finally answered late that afternoon, when
Urdeshi units searching the ruins of the palace found a lone Tanith scout
unconscious in the rubble.
His tags said his name was Mkoll.
Rawne’s forces were being hammered by the loxad in the palatial habs west
of the Alpha dome heartland. The aliens were using some kind of heavy
fragmentation mortar, perhaps a larger-scale version of their signature
flechette blasters. Obel had pressed his unit forward, and Bragg had managed
to hose one loxad position with cannonfire, but the deadly shells were still
whooping down.
With Troopers Lubba and Jajjo, Gol Kolea had broken through the back
wall of a ransacked kitchen into some kind of service tunnel that allowed
them to advance right up to flank the main loxad dug-outs. Emerging from the
tunnel, hunched low, Kolea could hear the regular punk-shiff! of the loxad
mortars, and a human voice screaming for a medic.
The trio ran low across debris-littered rockcrete and scooted behind an
exploded water main that was weeping frothy water into the road.
Caffran was lying on his back in a nearby shell-hole. His leg was
lacerated with loxatl barb shrapnel.
“Don’t be daft, sarge!” Lubba yelped, but Kolea was already running.
Flechette shot winnowed the air around him and he threw himself into the
shell-hole. “How’s it going, Caff?” he asked.
“Kolea. Feth, it hurts. The fething alien freaks have got the end of the
roadway locked up.”
Kolea looked at the wounds. “Nasty, but the medicae are on the way.
You’ll live, Caffran.”
“I don’t care about that!” Caffran said. “I care about Tona!”
“What?”
“Rawne sent us all forward. I got caught here, she went on with Alio and
Jenk. I think they were hit too. I can’t reach her on the vox.”
“Oh gak,” Kolea said, peering out of the shell-hole. “Stay here,” he said,
as if Caffran was in any state to move. “Sarge!”
“What?”
Caffran swallowed back his pain. “Why… why did you come to me when
I was anested? You were acting so… so strange. When Tona came to visit me
she gave me hell for getting into such a stupid fix. But I knew she was just
frightened. You, though… it was like you were really afraid I’d actually done
that stuff to that poor woman. What was that about?”
Kolea smiled at him. “Caff, it must be the parent in me. I’ll tell you when I
get back.” He jumped out of the shell-hole and started to run.
Allo and Jenk were dead. Criid was sprawled beside their remains,
wounded in the arm and side. Enemy fire wailed around them.
Kolea half-fell into her foxhole, banging his knee against a broken pipe.
“Hold tight, Tona,” he said. “Caff’s missing you.”
He scooped her up in his arms, ignoring her moans of pain and started to
run back the way he had come.
“You’re crazy!” she wailed as flechette shot exploded around them.
“Not the first time I’ve been accused of that,” he said, struggling. “You and
Varl ought to form a gakking dub.”
He reached the edge of the shattered buildings and almost threw Criid into
Jajjo’s arms as he fell down.
He was smiling, and only when he fell did they see the bloody mess where
the back of his skull had been.
“Sarge!” Lubba yelled, risking his own life to drag Kolea’s body into
cover from the crossfire. “Sarge! Sergeant Kolea! Please! Don’t be dead!
Don’t be dead!”
Bragg looked over at Caill. “Last box?” he asked.
“We’ve got two more,” said his loader.
Bragg sighed. He looked out of the nearest hole in the wall and shook his
head. Loxad flechette fire was sweeping the street outside. “Not going to be
enough to get through that. I’ll stay put and lay down some cover fire. You run
back down the line and get us some more, eh?”
Caill nodded. “I’ll be two minutes,” he said. “Don’t leave without me.”
Caill hurried away. Bragg looked over at the other Ghosts in the shelled
out basement: Tokar, Fenix, Cuu and Hwlan. “Any bright ideas?” he said.
“You give me a good spread of protective fire with that land-hammer,”
Hwlan said, “and I reckon I can get a group into that block opposite.”
“You’re on,” said Bragg and hefted the big support weapon into place.
“On three,” he said. “One, two—”
The cannon exploded into life, strafing the street with a devastating rain of
shots.
Hwlan, Fenix and Tokar surged out, running the gauntlet of fire.
The cannon clicked dry.
“Need another box?” Cuu asked.
“Yeah,” said Bragg. “That would be—”
The corner of the ammo box cracked into the side of Bragg’s head. He
slumped to the side, and passed out for a second.
“What the feth?” he spluttered, coming round. “Cuu? What the feth was
that?” Bragg felt blood pouring out of his scalp. He was dizzy and sick.
Lijah Cuu was standing, staring at him.
“You sold me out,” he said.
“Oh feth, Cuu! This isn’t the time to settle some stupid feud!”
“No? When would be a better time, Tanith? I don’t know, sure as sure.”
Bragg tried to get up. “You really have lost it, Cuu. Gaunt got you off. You
just got lashes. You were lucky.”
“Lucky?”
“I mean… feth, I don’t know what I mean. Feth, you’re scum. Gaunt will
have you shot for this and—”
“He ain’t gonna know, is he?” said Cuu. “Is he, you big dumbo?” In Cuu’s
right hand glittered thirty centimetres of silver Tanith warknife.
“Cuu? What the feth are you—”
Cuu plunged his straight silver into Bragg’s heart.
Bragg’s eyes widened. His lips gasped for a second, like a fish.
Cuu wrenched the dagger out and leaned forward so his mouth was right
next to the dying Tanith’s ear. “Just so’s you know… it was me. I did her.
And it was beautiful. She fought oh how she fought. Not like you, you big
dumbo.”
Bragg suddenly lurched up and swung the autocannon around by the barrel
like a club. If it had connected with the lean Verghastite it would surely have
crippled him. But Cuu had jerked out of the way.
“Try again, Bragg,” he said, and stabbed the blade down again. And again.
And again.
EPILOGUE:
THE GUNS OF TANITH
PHANTINE, 227.771, M41
“I don’t believe I had ever found a senior officer who appreciated the
Ghosts’ particular skills before. Now I have, I don’t really think I’m any
happier.”
—Ibram Gaunt, C-in-C, Tanith First
The drogue had docked just a few minutes before, but already the children
were running out and playing.
The Ghosts’ entourage had reached Ouranberg as part of the mass
reinforcement wave. Surly wharf masters oversaw the unloading of cargo
freight, while men who would soon become jugglers, mimes, fire-eaters and
knife-sharpeners haggled with them over the safe deposition of their worldly
goods.
And the children were loose. Laughing, chanting, scampering around the
docking bay. Yoncy tottered forward and half-threw a ball that Dalin went
scampering after.
“Kids, huh?” said the woman behind Curth. The surgeon looked round.
“Kids,” said Aleksa scornfully. “The battle’s won, the dead are dead, and
now the kids arrive to make us all soft and sad. Well, I’m not gakking sad.
Life sucks. Get a bloody helmet.”
“Agreed,” said Curth, taking a lho-stick from her pack and offering the box
to Aleksa. The blousy older woman with her boudoir finery took one and lit
them both from a chased silver igniter.
“Dalin! Careful with your sister now, you hear me?” she shouted. She
dropped her voice and added, “You’re the one he told, aren’t you?”
“The one he told?”
“Kolea said to me the only other person who knew was the lady doctor.
That’s you, isn’t it?”
“Yes,” Curth sighed.
After a while, Aleksa asked, “How’s Gol?”
“He’s alive,” said Curth. “But what?”
“His primary functions are intact. He’s conscious. But the damage to his
brain was considerable. He has total sociotypal memory loss. I mean total.
He doesn’t even know his own name. Or that he has kids. Nothing…”
Aleksa smiled. “So that solves a lot, really.”
“No,” said Curth, taking out the sealed letter and staring at it. “Gol Kolea
came back… but he didn’t come back. I… I don’t know what to do.”
“Honey,” said Aleksa, pressing the letter back into Curth’s coat, “take my
advice. Thank the Emperor and walk away.”
Curth folded up the letter and slowly wandered back up the docking ramp
into the city.
Van Voytz had been effusive in his praise. He was full of talk of
commendations and decorations. He spoke about petitioning Macaroth to
officially change the Tanith First’s regimental designation to reflect its
specialist stealth and infiltration strengths.
“The next time the guns of Tanith sound, I want it to be in support of my
advances,” Van Voytz had declared, pouring large snifters of amasec for his
assembled officers.
Gaunt hadn’t really been listening. The arch-enemy had been deprived of
Phantine. A significant heretic leader had been eliminated.
The Crusade force would now benefit from the planet’s massive vapour
mill output.
And he had kept alive as many men as possible in the pursuit of those
goals.
It was a victory, and duty had been done. Gaunt just didn’t share Van
Voytz’s desire to toast the living and the dead and talk about it all night. He
walked alone through the Imperial concourse. Clearance teams were still
searching the surrounding buildings for enemy survivors.
Gaunt supposed that the curse of mid-ranking officers like himself was that
they were still close enough to the sharp end to feel the loss. The Gaunts and
Rawnes and Fazalurs of this galaxy were the ones who got to cope with the
bloody aftermath of victory. The lord generals got to celebrate each triumph
because, to them, the dead were just names on data-slates. The chain of rank
insulated them from the emotional consequence. It made a generally decent
man like Van Voytz seem just as heartless as some of the callous bastards
Gaunt had been forced to follow in his time.
At least the perceived rift between the Tanith and the Verghastite that Hark
and Zweil had chided him about appeared to be easing. During the fight for
Ouranberg, the regiment had seemed much more of a single, integrated
whole.
Maybe sticking up for Cuu had sent the right message.
Gaunt returned to his section and had Beltayn transmit his respectful thanks to
all Tanith and Verghastites alike via all section leaders, along with the order
for the regiment to pull out. Urdeshi and Krassian reinforcements from
Cirenholm were coming in to supervise the occupation.
The guns of Tanith could fall silent for a while, and rest.
“Order and signal of thanks sent, sir,” said Beltayn.
“That’ll do,” said Ibram Gaunt.

A WARHAMMER 40,000 NOVEL
Sabbat Martyr
Gaunt’s Ghosts - 07
It is the 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor
has sat immobile on the Golden Throne of Earth. He is the master of mankind
by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might of his
inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with power
from the Dark Age of Technology. He is the Carrion Lord of the Imperium for
whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that he may never truly
die.
Yet even in his deathless state, the Emperor continues his eternal
vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the daemon-infested miasma of the warp,
the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the
psychic manifestation of the Emperor’s will. Vast armies give battle in his
name on uncounted worlds. Greatest amongst His soldiers are the Adeptus
Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades
in arms are legion: the Imperial Guard and countless planetary defence
forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the tech-priests of the Adeptus
Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely
enough to hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants —
and worse.
To be a man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live
in the cruellest and most bloody regime imaginable. These are the tales of
those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has
been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and
understanding, for in the grim dark future there is only war. There is no peace
amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter
of thirsting gods.
“By 773.M41, the eighteenth year of the Sabbat Worlds Campaign, the
Imperial crusade force under Warmaster Macaroth had yet failed to take
the notorious fortress world Morlond. As long as Morlond stood, the thrust
of the crusade was stalled, and Macaroth could not drive his forces
onwards into a decisive war with the core military strengths of the
archenemy overlord (‘Archon’), Urlock Gaur, in the Carcaradon Cluster.
More than ever, the crusade host seemed disastrously overstretched and
increasingly vulnerable to flank attack. Already, Chaos hosts commanded
by two of Gaur’s most ruthless lieutenant warlords, Anakwanar Sek and
Enok Innokenti, had enjoyed considerable success by counter-striking
along the coreward portion of the Imperial thrust. If such successes
continued, the crusade force risked being split in two, and the greater part
of it, along with the Warmaster himself, becoming cut off, surrounded and
annihilated.
“Macaroth was all too aware of the danger, and all too aware of the
imponderable nature of the problem. He could not remain overstretched for
fear of flank attack, but neither could he spare any forces from the
Morlond front, as a weakening there would leave his vanguard vulnerable
to Gaur. Either option seemed cursed with failure. Macaroth simply had to
decide which one to risk. Famously, he showed one of his generals two
identical cups of wine and asked him to pick one. “One is elixir, one is
poison,” he said. “How can I tell them apart?” the general asked. “By
taking one up and tasting it,” replied the Warmaster.
“Macaroth eventually decided to remain as he was, risking overstretch,
and fight on to take Morlond with one last effort. In the third quarter of
773, Enok Innokenti began his murderous, catastrophic flank attack in the
Khan Group. It was a time of disaster, looming failure.
“And miracles…”
—from A History of the Later Imperial Crusades
PROLOGUE
The intelligence, such as it was, had been in their possession for a week. Yet
two or three times a day, and more often during the watches of the night, He
would review it, as if somehow He expected it to change.
Etrodai wasn’t sure what that meant. He wasn’t sure if it meant He was
excited by the news, or disquieted. That troubled Etrodai enormously, for he
prided himself on knowing His whims and moods like no other. Etrodai had
been His lifeward for ninety-two years, had won that vaunted position by
besting the previous holder of the office in a legal murder-fight. No one knew
Him better than Etrodai.
Except now, Etrodai was no wiser than the rest.
All along the tarnished pillars and dusty alcoves of the Process, the
cobwebs fluttered and the bones began to chatter. It meant He was restless
again. Before the onyx door had even opened, Etrodai was on his feet, his
changeling blade skinned and raised in front of his face.
Etrodai waited, attentive, apprehensive. The chatter became more urgent.
The dry, beetle-clicks of the human skulls, most of them mottled brown with
decay as if they had been varnished, were bearable enough. The sounds of
the more alien skulls were harder to tolerate. They lisped and coughed,
clucking like birds, ticking like clocks, disarticulated mouthparts twitching in
the dust like dead leaves. Once, while He had been resting to heal a psi
wound, Etrodai had idled the long hours attempting to count the skulls in the
Process. He had given up around about ten thousand. They kept interrupting
him and making him lose count.
A soft rumble, and the onyx door, tall as five men and as broad, slid back
into the wet marrow of its hatch seal. Warm air exhaled through the gap. The
bones fell silent.
He emerged from His inviolable chamber. The null field popped like
surface tension around Him.
“Magister,” said Etrodai, keeping the blade raised but averting his gaze
respectfully. “What is your will?”
“I have made psyk-audience with the Archon, and now know his mind on
this. He says that if the news is true, I must act according to my heart.” His
voice was brittle, yet musical, like the notes of a bale-pipe or a sonoret, and
always made Etrodai feel ashamed of his own ugly, mechanically-formed
speech. “And my heart tells me we must make this our first duty above all
other concerns. Now, the instruments?”
“They’re assembled, Magister. On the hinterdeck. All of those it was safe
to assemble, that is.”
“I’ll speak with them and charge them,” He said, then hesitated. “But
first… I will review this great truth one last time.”
Etrodai was not surprised. He turned and led the way down the Process,
hearing each and every skull grate in its alcove as it turned to watch Him
pass.
The Process, tomb-dark and lit only by ancient crazed glow-spheres, was
a kilometre long. At the far end, goat-headed slave-carls turned the iron keys
and swung the towering brass doors open. The slave-carls looked at the
walls and sobbed, terrified lest they should catch the slightest glimpse of
Him.
Seven times thirteen men of the Retinue waited in the anteroom, under the
gilt-arched ceiling and the flaking murals of the Five Atrocities. Their heavy
boots slammed to attention in one perfect motion and they shouldered arms.
Their flanged body-armour was blue-black like Etrodai’s, and their heads
were concealed under broad-tailed helmets and visors with bulbous,
insectoid goggles.
With Etrodai leading, his sword pointing at the roof and skinned for so
long now that beads of blood were welling up along its thorny edge, the
Retinue fell in around them and marched in escort, right arms bent and locked
around each shouldered weapon, left arms snapping free like pendulums at
their sides. Two men ran ahead to open each set of doors in turn.
Access to the data crypt was sealed by a void shield that shimmered in the
air like oil on water. It disengaged at His merest touch. Any other man would
have lost his arm to the elbow if he had made contact. The Retinue waited
outside as Etrodai stepped into the crypt with Him.
The data crypt was cold and dim, and ribbed with a porous tissue like
calcified sinew. In the panels between the ribbing, the walls were etched
with words from a pre-Imperial language. A foggy, hazy light billowed
around their feet.
The secrets kept here whispered about them, hissing like steam or fat on a
skillet. Their murmur was not as loud as the chatter of the countless skulls in
the Process, but it was more insistent and far more repellent Vile whispers
settled around Etrodai, penetrating his armour, his skull and crawling into his
brain, telling him things that he, even he, had no desire to know.
The intelligence had been placed on a pedestal near the centre of the crypt.
It had been teased from the fused synapses of an expended seer gestalt and
kept in its latent thought-form to preserve its accuracy. This glowing engram
was a ribbon of light circling in a figure-of-eight path around a doughy lump
of vat-farmed cerebral tissue, on which it had been anchored onto to give it
focus.
Etrodai stood back as He stepped to the pedestal and ungloved his hands.
The chrome gauntlets hung from the wrist straps of His vambraces as His
long, quadruple-jointed fingers slid into the light and began to knead the
tissue with lascivious strokes. The winding ribbon of light faltered and
broke, and then the luminous strands of information began to flow up His
outstretched arms, across His wide shoulders and into the base of His brain.
He sighed and His head rolled back. Light shone out of His mouth and
illuminated a tiny spot on the crypt roof.
Etrodai waited…
The long fingers withdrew, and the engrain streamed back into its orbit
around the lump of tissue. He replaced His gloves.
“There’s no mistake,” He said. “I have examined this every way I know,
testing for invention and falsehood. This is not a lie. This is a manifest truth
from the sentiences of the immaterium.”
The notion chilled Etrodai and He seemed to notice the look on the
lifeward’s face.
“Don’t be troubled. While it might appear that this is a great blow to us, I
believe this is rather our perfect moment of triumph, and the feeble godlings
of human order have given it to us themselves.”
“Then my heart rejoices, Magister,” said Etrodai.
A respectful silence awaited them on the hinterdeck. The only sound was
the gusty hiss of the air scrubbers and the sub-threshold harmonic thrum of
the massive warp engines twenty decks above. The hinterdeck was a
subsidiary landing platform, reserved for the Magister’s personal use. It
jutted out like a shelf high above the long, gothic vault, fifteen hectares
square, that formed the primary flight deck for the colossal flagship’s fighter
screen. The squadrons had been ramped out to secure storage during the
voyage. The echoing space below was empty now except for rows of energy
bowsers, electric munition trains, and the launch cradles hanging like open
crab claws from the high roof. Yellow lights winked in series along the
runways scribed into the battered floor.
There were eight beings assembled there in the middle of the empty metal
platform. He had specifically requested nine for, according to Him, nine was
a significant number. The ninth, too dangerous for direct intercourse, was
suspended in a null field outside the hull, in the mouth of the main bay,
connected by tele-audience relay to the proceedings on the high platform.
Etrodai ordered the Retinue to wait by the entry hatch, and then stood
beside Him as He presented Himself to the assembled figures. Etrodai’s
skinned blade was so hungry by then that blood was dripping off his knuckles
and his arms ached with it. But Etrodai would not reskin his blade until it
was all done.
“I’ve a task for you,” He said. “A task of significance. I charge you nine
with it.”
They murmured. The triplets slithered and coiled their clammy grey hides
around each other. The other trio bowed their heads. The two loners
remained stiff and unmoving. An obscene rasp of digital filth crackled via the
vox relay from the thing in the null field outside.
“A martyr. A martyr once, a martyr always. Our enemies think they have
us, so we’ll abuse them of that idea. We’ll take this, their latest burst of
vitality, and make it their last. One amongst you will perform this deed. I
don’t care who. You will break their renewed hopes and cast them into the
dust. This trust I put in you.”
They murmured again, a vow of promise.
“Look at me,” He said.
They had all been standing with their backs to Him, fearful of gazing
directly upon His form. Now, one by one and hesitantly, they turned. The
triplets hissed at the sight of Him and regurgitated venom-soaked lumps of
their last meal, which had been digesting in their throat sacks. The other trio
turned, but only their leader, the tall one with the green silk robes and
intricate body art, blanched to look on Him. The tattooed leader was as tall
and thickly muscled as Etrodai, but his two companions were little baseformed
things with the morbidly blind eyes of psykers. The two loners turned
too. The figure in the crimson armour of the Blood Pact dropped to his knees
and uttered a stifled prayer. The other, the cadaverously pale xenosbreed in
glossy black, just stared.
“Good,” He sighed. He turned around and stared out of the main deck’s
mouth at the feral thing trapped in the force-sphere “And you, Karess? Are
you ready?”
From the null field outside, a brutal curse rasped over the vox-link. It was
as ingenious as it was anatomically horrific.
He smiled. That was the one thing Etrodai could not stand. His Magister’s
smile was the most terrible thing in creation. He shuddered and felt as though
he were about to retch.
“Two rotations from now,” said Enok Innokenti, Magister and Warlord,
“the word will be given and my host will fall upon this cluster and quench
the fires of its suns with blood. The crusade of the Imperium of Mankind will
break and beg for a quick death.”
He paused. He was still smiling. “Under cover of that great attack, the real
work will begin.”
ONE
THE BRINK OF MIDNIGHT
“How many times have we stood here, you and I,
surveying the field before battle? How many times have we won?
How many times must we lose to have lost all those
victories and promises of victory? Once, old friend.
Once. Once. Once.”
—Warmaster Slaydo, to an aide, before Balhaut
“Bad day coming!” the man cried aloud. “Bad day coming! Bad day in the
morning!”
He had clambered up onto an almsman’s wagon, ignoring attempts to pull
him down, and was now shouting, arms outstretched and fingers clawing, at
both the sky and the gathering crowd.
“Bad day is coming down upon us all! On you! And you, sir! And you,
madam! Nine more wounds! Nine times nine!”
Some in the crowd were booing him. Others made the sign of the aquila or
the beati mark to ward off any evil luck he was bringing on with his words.
Others, Anton Alphant noticed wryly, were listening quite intently.
There was nothing new in the man’s rantings. He, and others like him
throughout the camps, had been causing scenes like this regularly in recent
days. It wasn’t good for morale, and it certainly wasn’t endearing the pilgrim
mass to the city authorities.
Almsmen, their rank denoted by the blue ribbons that fluttered from their
long dust-cloaks, were trying to coax the man down off the wagon. His feet
had already knocked over several sacks of the corn-wafers and hardtack they
had brought to distribute through the camp. An ayatani from one of the
farworld congregations had elbowed his way through the crowd and was
holding up a prayer-paddle as he shouted benedictions at the man. Two junior
Ecclesiarchy adepts were clutching pewter cups and using their silver
aspergillums to shake water at the improvising preacher. Holy water, Alphant
was sure, that they had purchased at great expense from the stoups of the
Holy Balneary.
Alphant closed his fingers around the ampulla of holy water in his own
coat pocket. He’d come an awfully long way to get it, and it had cost him the
last of his coins. He wasn’t about to waste it so generously.
“Maybe we should stop him,” Karel said.
“We?” smiled Alphant. “You mean me.”
“Everyone listens to you.”
“He’s entitled to his opinion. Every last soul here came because it
mattered to them more than anything else. You can’t deny his passion.”
“He’s scaring people,” said Karel, and a fair few of the other infardi
grouped around the clock shrine with them agreed. “Things could get ugly.”
They were right. Several penitents in the crowd had become so agitated by
the man’s preaching they had begun to scourge themselves. The row had even
captured the attention of some of the nearest stylites. They turned round on
their pillar tops to watch, and some shouted out over the heads of the crowd.
Other pilgrim troupes had wheeled or carried their clock shrines up close to
the wagon, pointing them at him as if the symbolism might deter him.
It seemed to make him worse.
“The brink of midnight, and then the bad day dawns! Fire from the heavens
and the precious blood spilled!”
“Can’t you make him stop, Alphant?” Valmont asked.
“I’m no priest,” said Alphant. How many times had he said that? Just an
agri-worker from Khan II who had made the pilgrimage here when he’d
heard the news because it seemed like the right thing to do. Along the way —
and it had been a hard journey — he’d somehow become the nominal leader
of those he’d travelled with. They looked to him for opinion and direction,
more than ever since they’d reached the cold, austere reality of the camps.
He’d never asked for the responsibility.
Then, of course, she’d never asked for hers.
Alphant had no idea where that sudden, sobering notion had sprung from.
But it was enough to make him change his mind, hand his bowl and breviary
to Karel, and walk towards the ruckus around the wagon.
He’d gone no more than three steps when someone in the angry crowd
hurled a lump of quartz at the gibbering man. It missed, but others followed.
One cracked against his forehead and he toppled back off the wagon top.
“Damn!” said Alphant.
The crowd went mad. Fighting broke out, and more missiles flew —
rocks, ampullas, bless-bottles. The alms wagon overturned with a crash and
people started shrieking.
Alphant put his head down and shouldered into the surging mob. The
hapless preacher would be torn apart in this, and the last thing the camp
needed was a death. Alphant was still a strong man, and he found he
remembered some of the old moves, enough to tackle and dissuade the most
boisterous rioters in his path anyway. Nothing too vicious, just a little
deflection and the occasional squeeze of a nerve point.
He got round the upturned wagon, and paused to prevent three screaming
infardi from throttling one of the almsmen. Then he looked for the preacher
who had started it all.
And saw an amazing thing.
The preacher was sitting on the rough ground, both hands clamped to his
forehead. Blood was pouring out through his fingers, staining his robes and
making dark patches in the dust. He was in no state to protect himself.
But no one was touching him. A girl, a young girl no more than eighteen,
was standing over him. Her face, thin and pale, was confident, the look in her
green eyes soft. She had one hand extended, palm out, to ward off the riot.
Every time a part of it spilled towards her, she moved her hand in that
direction and the people drew back. That simply, that quietly, she was
maintaining a tiny circle of calm around the preacher, keeping at bay a crowd
lusting for his blood.
He moved towards her. She looked at him, but did not turn her palm
towards him, as if recognising his peaceful intentions.
“Do you need help?” Alphant asked.
“This man does,” she said. Her voice was tiny, but he heard her clearly
over the uproar. He bent down at her side, and examined the preacher’s
injury. It was deep and dirty. He tore a strip off his shirt, and wetted it with
water from his ampulla without even thinking of the cost. Wasn’t it said to
cure all wounds?
“Bad day coming,” the man murmured as Alphant wiped the blood away.
“Enough of that,” Alphant said. “It’s already here as far as you’re
concerned.” He wondered how long the frail girl could hold the commotion
at bay. He wondered how she was doing it.
“What’s your name?” he asked, looking up at her.
“Sabbatine,” she said. He laughed at that. Saint names and their
diminutives were common enough in this part of the Imperium, and there was,
as might be expected, a disproportionately high number of Sabbats, Sabbatas,
Sabbatines, Sabbeens, Battendos and the like in the camps. But for her, it
seemed terribly appropriate.
“I think he’s right,” she said.
“What?”
“I think something bad is about to happen.”
There was a quality to the way she said this that was more alarming than
the entirety of the preacher’s manic declamation.
“You mean like another attack? The raiders again?”
“Yes. Get to safety.”
Alphant didn’t question her any further. He got his hands under the
preacher’s arms and hoisted him up. When he’d got the lolling man upright he
realised that the girl had disappeared.
And the nature of the uproar around him had changed. It wasn’t a riot any
more It was a panic. People were fleeing, screaming, falling over one
another in their anxiety to leave. Something was burning. Smoke filled the
low sky above the Ironhall camp.
“Bad day…” the blood-streaked man gurgled.
“Yeah,” said Alphant. He’d just heard a sound that he hadn’t heard in
twenty years, not since he’d handed back his standard issue mark IV, put his
cap pins and badge away in a dresser drawer, and used his Guard-muster
pay-out as deposit on a nice little parcel of cropland in the agri-collective
west of the primary hive of Khan II.
The snap-crack of a lasrifle.
The tac logis situation reports were urgently identifying a heretic raid in
progress in the pilgrim encampment just west of the Ironhall district, and true
enough there was a furious plume of smoke rising from that quarter, a plume
ominously undercut by the blink of weapons fire.
But as Udol rode a lurching carrier down the Guild Slope, through the
deafening uproar of the panicked suburb, he caught sight of fat brown vapour
clouds wallowing up heavily from the obsidae east of the Simeon Aqueduct.
“Is that the aqueduct?” he shouted.
“Fixing it now, major!” answered his signals officer, dropping back inside
the carrier’s rusty top hatch to man the tactical station.
“It is the aqueduct, sir!” the signalman called back a moment later.
“What—”
“The aqueduct, and the obsidae on the other side of it!”
Their helmet mics were turned up full, but it was still nigh on impossible
to hear one another over the din. The engines of the APCs were revving, and
the vast crowds packing the street were wailing and shouting. Gorgonaught,
the great prayer horn at the northern end of Principal I, was booming at the
white sky from its ancient tower. Udol was sure he could also hear the slap
of distant detonations and the sizzling kiss of impacts against the outer fan of
shield cover. It was coming down again, fourth day in a row.
Udol slithered down inside the hull and cranked his bare-metal rocker seat
around so he could look over the signalman’s shoulder at the screen.
“What does tac logis have?”
“Nothing on that, major. They’re directing us forward to the Ironhall zone.
Captain Lamm has engaged. Heretic raid coming in from the wastes. He—”
“They’re in at the east door too,” Udol muttered. He adjusted his vox set’s
channel. “Pento? Udol here. Take the front six with you and go look after
Lamm’s interests. Seven and eight? Move off with me.”
Objections and several requests for clarification crackled back, but Udol
ignored them. He tapped his driver on the arm and pointed.
The carrier obediently veered east parting the rushing crowds with blares
from its warning sirens. Two other units from the convoy turned with it. They
got off the Guild Slope and rumbled down a gravel linkway deeply
shadowed by the tall buildings on either side. At the end of the linkway, the
buildings framed an oblong of sky stained with clots of smoke.
They emerged onto Principal VI, flanked by low-rise habs, and crossed the
wide boulevard until they were facing the towering lime-brick arches of the
Simeon Aqueduct. Beyond that massive arched structure lay the open reaches
of a glass field. Like so many vacant spaces at the city edges, the area had
become a pilgrim shanty over the last two months, a sea of rough canvas
tents, survival blisters and hastily raised clock shrines. Another makeshift
expansion of the city’s limits to accommodate the massive influx of
believers.
Filthy brown smoke billowed across the whole campsite and washed out
between the arches of the aqueduct. Dirty pilgrims were pouring out with it,
struggling with children and belongings.
“Some damn infardi’s knocked over a campstove in his jubilation,” said
the signalman. “It happened the other week over at Camp Kiodrus. Whole
row of tents went up and—”
“I don’t think that’s what it is, Inkerz,” Udol snapped. “Driver! Get us in
through there!”
The driver dropped the gears down to the lowest ratio and began to roll
the carrier through the nearest arch span onto the obsidae. Almost at once
they were crushing tent structures and lean-tos under their heavy, solid
wheels. Frantic pilgrims, flowing around the vehicle as they fled the area,
hammered their fists on the armoured sides and implored them to stop.
“No go, major,” said the driver, hauling on the brake. “Not unless you
want to, you know, crush them.”
“Everybody out!” Udol ordered. “Rove-team spread! Get on with it!”
The side hatches on all three troop carriers rattled open and the troops
dismounted, fifteen from each. They lunged their way forward against the tide
of the crowd, carrying their weapons upright Udol paused long enough for
Inkerz to strap the compact accelerant tank to his back and connect the hose,
then he took off, pushing to the head of his men. He raised his armoursleeved
left arm, squeezed the stirrup built into the palm of the glove, and
scorched off a little rippling halo of flame into the air so they could pick him
out in the crush. Once he had their attention, he dispersed them left and right
through the forest of tents and personal detritus.
Fifty paces into the shanty, the place was almost deserted. The smoke was
thicker. Udol was appalled but unsurprised at the wretched conditions the
pilgrims had been living in. Junk, rubbish and human waste covered the
narrow tracks that wound between the pathetic tents. It was hard to see more
than a few metres in any direction. Quite apart from the smoke and the
shelters, there were clock shrines everywhere No two were identical, but
they all followed the same essential pattern: a timepiece of some sort —
domestic clock, electric timer, digital chronometer, handsprung horolog —
set in a home-made wooden box, the taller and more gaudily painted the
better, it seemed. He looked at one nearby. As tall as a man, with reclaimed
tin shutters open at the top to reveal the clock face, it was set on a wooden
handcart and anchored in place with industrial rivets. The thing had been
painted gold and silver and, in places, green, and skirts of plastic sheeting
had been wrapped around the towering body. Inside that upright box, a
stationary pendulum hung down, festooned with dried flowers, crystals,
keepsakes, coins and a hundred other votive offerings. At the top, inside the
shutters, the old clock face and the hands had been sprayed green and then the
dial and the tips of the hands picked out again in gold. The hands were set at
a heartbeat before midnight.
Major Udol knew precisely the significance of that.
He went around the shrine, waving the troopers behind him close. The
pilgrim shelters ahead of them were burning freely. Dirty yellow flames
licked away shelter cloth and canvas and leapt up into the morning air,
swirling into dense, dark smoke Udol saw a clock shrine in the heart of the
fire succumb and topple.
The trooper beside him suddenly jumped back, as if in surprise. Then he
did it again and fell on his back.
Shot through the torso, twice. Udol didn’t even have to look.
He barked a hasty warning into his vox. The men around him scattered into
cover. Two-thirds of them made it The bastards had been waiting.
Udol crouched down behind the relative shelter of an overturned flatbed
as energy bolts spat and whistled overhead. One of his men nearby got in
behind the frame of a plastic tent and then rolled over onto his side as a lasround
came through the fabric skin and into the back of his head. Another
man, caught in the open, was knocked over by a laser bolt that broke both his
legs. He fell hard, and started crawling until another shot hit him in the face.
Udol felt his heart race. He glimpsed movement on the pathway next to the
fire, drew his laspistol, and fired a few bright bars of energy down the
narrow track. The troopers around him began to open up with their carbines.
“Inkerz!” Udol voxed. “Get tac logis. Tell them there’s another hot raid
coming in right down here under the aqueduct!”
“Acknowledged, sir.”
It was hot, all right, and getting hotter. Udol counted forty-plus hostiles out
there, in amongst the abandoned tents. He glimpsed drab red body armour
and dust-cloaks. They matched the description of the hostiles that had been
hitting and running all around the city skirts for the last four days. Heretic
zealots, drawn to the city as surely as the pilgrims, as anxious to deny the
truth occurring here as the pilgrims were to celebrate it. Marshal Biagi had
told Udol personally that the hostiles were most probably militant cultists
from a world in the local group. They’d made their way to the planet under
cover of the mass pilgrim influx to stage terror attacks on the city.
The bastards could fight. Fight disciplined, and that was what made them
really scary. Udol had tangled with warp scum many times before — had the
scars to prove it — and Imperial military rigour had triumphed over zealot
fanaticism every time.
Maybe it was the Imperium’s turn to play the fanatic, Udol considered.
According to every clock in sight, the hour was on them. They certainly had
something to be fanatical about at last.
A sudden wind picked up, and began to drive the smoke cover hard north.
A great part of the hostiles’ position in amongst the tents was abruptly
unveiled. Udol coordinated his shooters and began systematic counter-fire.
His troop pounded rapid fire into the shamble of tents and bivouacs, and then
pushed forward through the shanty, keeping their heads low.
A weapon cracked close to Udol, and the man to his left tumbled over onto
the remains of a survival blister. Udol swung round and fired his sidearm,
hitting the hostile square in the snarling iron visor he was wearing. Before
the bastard’s body had even folded up under him, another two came charging
out of cover, firing wildly. Udol dropped to one knee, raised his left arm
straight and clenched the stirrup grip. A long spear of incandescent flame
leapt from the torch-vent behind the knuckles of his glove and broke around
their torsos. Both staggered, ablaze, screaming. The flames cooked off the
powercells in the nearest one’s webbing and blew him apart, shredding his
arms and torso right off his collapsing legs in a searing flash. The explosion
felled his companion, who lay writhing and burning on the ground. Udol
walked over to him and executed him with a single shot from his laspistol.
“Farenx. Beresi. Get forward on the double,” Udol told the men behind
him. They were close to the edge of the shanty spread, and the hostiles were
falling back fast. Just heretics, Udol thought. Maniac cultists testing the faith
and resolve of the city with their cowardly terror-tactics. Exactly what the
Regiment Civitas Beati had been formed to fight.
But when he reached the hem of the shanty, he realised he was wrong. It
was more than that, far more. The open vista of the obsidae lay before him: a
flat, cold waste of grey pumice and dust flecked by litters of black volcanic
glass. It stretched away north for three kilometres towards Grace Gorge and
the murky crags of the Stove Hills.
Three vehicles were approaching, striding in towards the shelter camp.
Stalk-tanks. Behind them, at their plodding heels, came a fanned out line of
over two hundred hostiles on foot, draped in dull red dust-capes. Since when
did cult heretics have armour? Since when did they assault like a military
force?
“Oh crap!” Udol heard himself say. “Fall back! Fall back!”
The stalk-tanks came on, scuttling like arachnids. Each had six pistongeared
legs that supported the low-slung body casings. Udol could see the
drivers in the underslung bubbles beneath the tails. On each raised head
section, dual mini-turrets rotated and began to fire.
The blistering shots came in constant, rippling waves as the barrels of the
double pulse lasers in each mini-turret pumped, recoiled and fired again with
brutal, mechanised rhythm. Udol saw Beresi cut in two, and three other
troopers lifted off the ground by the overpressure of impact blasts.
Detonations threw pumice and obsidian chips into the air. Twinkling
scratches of light flickered along the advancing row of blood-red troopers as
they began to fire their weapons too. Udol fell into cover. He heard men he’d
known since childhood screaming their last words into their moulded
rebreather masks.
He did the only thing he could think of. He prayed to the Saint.
Fifteen kilometres south, at the crest levels of the inner city, the immortal
choir was tuning up. Rampshel, the choir-master, was limping to and fro,
waving his baton, and calling for the second voices to “pitch yourselves, for
Terra’s sake!” The children in the front rank, some no more than six years old
standard, were fidgeting with their formal ruffs and vestments, and gazing
into the distance. The fumes of incense burners filled the cool air, and the
temple slaves were setting out the last of the golden reliquary boxes under
direction of the High Ecclesiarch and his black-robed provosts.
“Almost there, first officiary,” assured Rampshel as he shuffled past,
leaning on his silver-knobbed cane. “Absolutely nearly almost there.”
“Very good, choir master. Carry on,” said Bruno Leger, elected first
officiary of Beati City. He was a small man, with a cleanly shaved scalp and
a neatly clipped goatee. He settled his mantle of office around his shoulders
with a fastidious gesture, and double-checked that his amulet was hanging
squarely on his chest. By his side, Marshal Biagi folded his huge arms and
sighed.
“We’re good, I think,” muttered the first officiary. “Are we good?”
“We’re good, sir,” replied Biagi.
“Are we? Fine Excellent. I mean, is this… you know… sufficient?”
“It’s fine, first officiary,” said Biagi. He smoothed his regimental sash. “If
the bloody choir can hit a note, we’ll be laughing.”
“Are they off-key? Are they? Off-key?” First Officiary Leger craned his
head and cupped a hand around his ear. “They’re off, aren’t they? I’ll have a
word…”
“Sir, please,” said Ayatani Kilosh, extending a gnarled hand out of the
folds of his long, blue silk robes and placing it reassuringly on Leger’s arm.
“Everything is quite perfect.”
“Is it? Is it perfect? Good. Excellent. Why are those little boys wandering
off? Shouldn’t they be in the front rank of the choir?”
“Rampshel will see to it, sir,” said Biagi.
“Will he? I hope so. I want everything to be perfect. These are heroes
we’re welcoming today. Veterans. Their reputation precedes them.”
“Certainly it does, sir,” said Ayatani Kilosh.
A shadow flickered past overhead, momentarily blotting out the skylights
of the ceremonial docking terrace. They all felt the thump of touch down.
“Well, they’re here,” said Leger.
Rampshel raised his arms and the choir began to sing. He was conducting
them strenuously when the first set of the terrace’s inner hatches cycled open
and steam hissed in.
First Officiary Leger wasn’t quite sure what to expect, except something
heroic. The choir, lungs bursting and antiphonals held open in front of them,
voiced the Great Supplication of the Beati. They were bloody well almost in
tune too.
Two figures sauntered down out of the steam. They came side by side. A
louche male with a handsome face and the eyes of a joker, and a slender
female with cropped bleached hair and an attitude. Both were dressed in
matt-black fatigues and body armour; both had lasrifles slung casually over
their shoulders. The man had an augmetic shoulder, and winked the moment
he saw Leger. The woman was wearing a fur-trimmed bomber jacket, and
carried her lasrifle yoked horizontally so that her right arm could hang near
the trigger grip and her left folded casually over the top like it was a
speeder’s door.
They stalked down into the docking terrace, ignoring the efforts of the
choir.
Leger stepped forward. “On behalf of the people of—”
The man with the augmetic implant turned, smiled, and put a finger to his
lips. Behind him, the female completed her sight check of the area and raised
a hand to her headset.
“Site’s clean,” Biagi heard her say. “Come on out.”
A silhouette appeared in the hatchway, back lit at first by the vapour. An
imposing figure in a long coat and a peaked cap. First Officiary Leger
breathed in expectantly.
The figure walked into the light. He was a tall, lean man in the field dress
of a commissar, but his epaulettes showed the rank of colonel. His face was
as hard as a knife. He came down the ramp to face the trio of dignitaries,
knelt before the first officiary and took his cap off.
“Ibram Gaunt, Tanith First, reporting as ordered,” he said.
So this was the famous Gaunt, thought Biagi. He wasn’t especially
impressed. Gaunt and his men, so the briefing files had said, were front-line
grunts. They certainly had that mad dog smell about them. Not house-trained.
Biagi had serious doubts they were suitable for the task they had been chosen
to perform.
Gaunt rose.
“Welcome, welcome, colonel-commissar,” said Leger, taking Gaunt
daintily by the shoulders and kissing him on the cheeks. He had to stand on
tiptoe to do this. Gaunt seemed to tolerate the custom the way a guard dog
tolerates the occasional brisk rub between the ears. Leger began to make a
fuller and longer speech of welcome in High Gothic.
“You arrive cautious of your own safety,” Biagi cut in, nodding at the pair
of troopers who had preceded Gaunt out of his lander. Gaunt narrowed his
eyes and looked at Biagi questioningly.
“Marshal Timon Biagi, commanding the PDF and civic regiments.”
Gaunt saluted. “My sergeants here insisted,” he said, indicating the waiting
pair. “During our descent, we were informed that a raid was underway.”
“In the city fringes, not here,” Biagi replied. “My forces have it contained.
We have a minor ongoing problem with heretic dissidents. There was no
threat to your safety.”
“We prefer to check that sort of thing for ourselves,” said the female
sergeant addressing Biagi directly.
“Criid,” Gaunt scolded softly.
“My apologies,” she said. “We prefer to check that sort of thing for
ourselves, sir.”
Biagi grinned. Seemed this famous pack leader couldn’t even keep his
dogs in line. He looked the female — Criid, was it?—up and down and said,
with a mocking tone, “A woman?”
She fixed Biagi with an unblinking stare and then repeated his head-to-toe
appraisal. “A man?”
she said. The male sergeant with the augmetic limb sniggered.
“Zip it, Varl,” said Gaunt. He faced Biagi. “Let’s not get off on the wrong
foot, marshal,” he said. “I won’t reprimand my people for being dutiful.”
“What about for speaking out of turn?” Biagi said.
“Of course, the moment I hear one of them do so.”
“Well, it’s quite wonderful to have you here!” the first officiary said with a
rush of false enthusiasm, clearly desperate to brush over the awkwardness.
“Isn’t it? Quite wonderful?”
“I’m here because I was ordered to be here by the Warmaster himself,”
Gaunt said. “It remains to be seen what else is wonderful about it.”
“May I say, colonel-commissar,” said Kilosh, speaking for the first time,
“that remark disturbs me.” Though tall, he was a very old man, yet his gaze
had more strength and confidence in it than that of either the marshal or the
first officiary. “It might easily have been mistaken for heresy.”
Gaunt stiffened and said carefully “No such offence was intended. I was
not referring to the wonder that has taken place here, rather I meant the grave
consequences that might be set off by such a thing.”
Kilosh nodded, as if appeased. “We have met before,” he began.
“I remember, Ayatani Kilosh,” said Gaunt making him a small, formal
bow. “Three years ago, sidereal. In the Doctrinopolis of Hagia. A brief
meeting, but it would be rude of me not to recall it. Your king, Infareem
Infardus, was dead, and I was the bearer of that ill news.”
“That was a dark moment in the history of Hagia,” Kilosh agreed, rather
flattered by Gaunt’s precise recollection. “And a bleak time for my holy
order. But times have changed. The miracle has happened. The galaxy is a
brighter place now, and you deserve thanks for your part in that.”
“My part?”
“The efforts of your regiment. You protected the Shrinehold and drove
away the enemy. That’s why you’re here.”
“You requested it?”
“No, colonel-commissar,” Kilosh smiled. “She did.”
Gaunt hesitated, and stroked his fingers down one side of his lean chin
thoughtfully. “I look forward to talking with you more on this subject,
ayatani-father,” he said. “First, I would like the permission of the first
officiary… and the honourable marshal… to dispose my men.”
Leger nodded eagerly, and made another little bow. Gaunt turned away and
walked back towards the docking hatches.
“What do you make of him?” Kilosh whispered.
“Not enough to care about,” said Biagi.
“He seems like a decent fellow,” said Leger brightly. “Doesn’t he? Decent
sort?”
“Oh, I think he is,” said Kilosh. “Almost too decent. And that’s where we
might have a problem. It almost seems to me he doesn’t believe.”
“Then he must be made to believe,” said Biagi. He paused as he saw a
thick set man in the uniform of a line commissar emerge from one of the
hatches. “Excuse me,” he said, and walked away.
Tanith personnel poured out onto the assembly floor. As he strode down the
metal deckway, Biagi could see hatch after hatch opening along the
ornamental terrace. Men and, in places, women, clad in the same dirty black
and draped with camo-capes, were exiting the fleet of drop craft, lugging
munition boxes, stow crates and kitbags. They had a smell to them. The smell
of dirt and fyceline and jellied promethium that no amount of bathing could
scrub out. The shadows of other landing ships flickered across the terrace
skylights, and there was the thump — and dank of landing clamps engaging.
Steam vented through the floor grates.
The newcomers gave Biagi a courteous wide berth. He was a senior
officer, and also an imposing figure. Shaven-headed, with dark olive skin and
amber eyes, he wore the ceremonial battledress of the city regiment:
gleaming brown leather embossed with gold-wire detailing. His left arm and
chest were covered with polished, segmented armour plating and, on his
back, under the fold of the scarlet sash, his accelerant tank was locked in
place.
Biagi stopped as he came on three troopers hefting a pallet of promethium
tanks out of a landing hatch.
“You. What is this?”
“Sir?” said the nearest, a bear-like oaf with a shaggy moustache.
“What are your names?” asked Biagi.
“Trooper Brostin, sir,” said the bear. He gestured to his fellows. “This
here’s Lubba and Dremmond.” The other two men saluted quickly. Lubba
was a short, heavy brute covered in the most barbaric tattoos. Dremmond
was younger and more plainly made, his hair short and dark.
“You’re flame troopers?”
“Sir, yes sir,” said Brostin. “Emperor’s own. He puts the fire in us and we
put his fire into his enemies.”
“Well, you can put those tanks and those burner pumps back on the lander,
trooper.”
“Sir?”
“City bye-laws. Only the officer class of the Regiment Civitas Bead is
permitted flamers in battle.”
“Begging your pardon, your sir-ship… why?” asked Lubba.
“On this world, water is power, and the enemy of water — flame — is a
privilege exercised only by the high-born warrior class. Do you require more
of an explanation?”
“No, sir, we don’t,” said Brostin.
Biagi moved on. “Commissar Hark?”
The commissar turned, and quickly saluted.
“Biagi, Marshal Civitas Beati. Welcome to Herodor,” Biagi said, returning
the salute and shaking Hark by the hand. “I was asked to look out for you.”
“Really?”
“The general would like a word in private.”
“I thought he might,” said Viktor Hark.
Gingerly lowering his aged frame, Ayatani Zweil prostrated himself and
kissed the metal deck, murmuring prayers that he had known most of his days
but which only now seemed to have meaning.
There were Ghosts all around him, off-loading from the landers. Many
knelt down around him, producing their own green silk faith ribbons and
kissing them the way he had taught them. They were faithful, these boys and
girls, these soldiers. It was a glorious thing to see. He unwound his own
beaded green ribbon from around his wizened knuckles and began to recite
the litany.
Gaunt appeared beside him and gently raised him to his feet.
“I must finish—” Zweil began.
“I know. But you’re in the middle of a landing deck and liable to be
crushed underfoot if you stay there.”
Zweil huffed but allowed Gaunt to lead him out of the way as Obel and
Garond manhandled a crate of rockets out onto the docking terrace with an
anti-grav hoist.
“Are you all right?” Gaunt asked.
The imhava ayatani stared up at Gaunt with ferociously beady eyes. “Of
course I am! How could I not be?”
“You are over-tired, ayatani-father. The long voyage has drained you.”
Zweil snorted. If Gaunt had suggested such a thing back on Aexe, he might
well have agreed. Back there, he’d tried to ignore the signs, but there had
been no denying that his great age was catching up with him. He had honestly
begun to wonder how much longer fate was going to give him.
Then, the news had come. And new vitality had filled his arthritic joints
and dimming mind.
Zweil looked at Gaunt and regretted his sharpness. “Ignore me. I’m old
and wishful and I’ve spent the last few months on a Navy packet ship
dreaming of what awaits us here. I expected…”
“What?”
Zweil shook his head.
“A smell of sweet uncorrupted flesh permeating the entire planet? A scent
of ishunbine?”
Zweil chuckled. “Yes, probably. All this long voyage from Aexe Cardinal,
I’ve been wondering what to expect.”
“Me too,” said Gaunt.
“Ibram… I almost can’t believe it’s true.”
“Nor I, father.”
There was something in Gaunt’s voice that made Zweil pause. He glanced
at his friend the colonel-commissar and saw from the look on his face that
Gaunt had let something slip in the tone of his reply.
Zweil stared at him and frowned. “What’s the matter?”
“Nothing. Skip it.”
“I will not. Gaunt? If I didn’t know better, I’d take you to be a doubter.
What aren’t you telling me?”
“Nothing, like I said.”
“On Aexe, she spoke to you—”
Gaunt’s voice dropped to a whisper. “Please, ayatani-father. That must
remain between us. It’s a very private thing. All I meant was…”
“What?”
“Has anything ever seemed too good to be true to you?”
Zweil grinned. “Of course There was a rather limber girl on Frenghold,
but that matter is even more privy than your incident on Aexe Cardinal. I
understand doubts, Ibram. The Beati herself warned us against false idols in
her epistles. But the divinations cannot lie. Every Ecclesiarchy church in the
sub-sector has been sent signs and prophesies. And you… you have more
reason to trust than any living being on this world.”
Gaunt breathed deeply. “I trust in the ministry of the Saint and the
inscrutable workings of the God-Emperor. It’s men I don’t trust.”
Zweil was disconcerted, but he managed a smile and patted Gaunt on the
arm. “Forget the frailties of men, Ibram. On Herodor, there is emphatic
wonder.”
“Good. If you see Ana… never mind, there she is.”
Gaunt left the old priest and edged through the press of disembarking
Ghosts.
“Ana?”
Surgeon Ana Curth looked up from a shipment of sterilised theatre tools
she had been itemising. She rose, tucking her data-slate under her arm and
smoothing her short, bob-cut hair away from her heart-shaped face.
“Colonel-commissar?”
“The matter we spoke of during the voyage…”
She sighed. “You know what? I was humouring you, Ibram. All those
weeks stuck with you on a transport. It was easier to nod along than speak my
mind. Well, we’re here now, and I’m speaking my mind. You should be
talking to Dorden about this.”
Gaunt winced. “The chief medic and I aren’t getting along at the moment.”
“Well, that’s because you’re both stubborn fools and I for one—”
“Shut up, Curth.”
“Shutting up, sir.”
“I want you to do this for me. Please. Privately. Quietly.”
“It’s a matter of faith—”
“You may question me on anything, surgeon, except faith.”
She shrugged. “Okay. You win. I’ll get my kit, even though… even though,
mind… I don’t like it.”
She moved away, and then turned and called back: “You understand I’m
only doing this because you’re so amazing in bed.”
The Ghosts around them came to a sudden halt. Several dropped their
kitbags. Curth scowled at them all. “A joke. It’s a joke. Oh for feth’s sake,
you people…”
She disappeared into the press. Gaunt looked at the staring troopers
around him. “As you were,” he began and then sighed and made a dismissive
gesture.
“Sir?”
It was Beltayn, Gaunt’s adjutant. Gaunt didn’t like the look on his face.
“Out with it.”
“Sir?”
Gaunt tipped his head down and looked at Beltayn. “Something’s awry. I
can tell.”
Beltayn grimaced toothily and nodded. “We’re… we’re missing a couple
of landers.”
“A couple?”
“Three or so.”
“Three or so?”
“Well. Four actually.”
“Which ones?”
“Two, three, four and five.”
“Corbec, Rawne, Mkoll and Soric I know I’m going to regret asking this,
Beltayn, but do you have any idea why that might be?”
“They diverted during descent, sir.”
“Diverted? On whose authority? Let me guess… Corbec?”
“Yes sir.”
“And they are now where?”
“As I understand it, sir, they were alerted to the action at the city perimeter
and Colonel Corbec — as it were — decided they should…”
“Should?”
“Muck in, sir.”
“Oh feth,” said Gaunt.
Major Udol rolled. Fire from the stalk-tanks was smashing up the terrain all
around him. The high-pitched whoop-whoop of their pumping guns was all
he could hear. He was bleeding from a scalp wound. The scorched remains
of one of his men was hanging from a semi-collapsed tentframe in front of
him.A shadow passed overhead, and he saw from the dust the wind had
changed again. It was blowing a gale suddenly. Grit pattered against him.
What the hell was that?
Udol looked up and froze. Thrusters flaring and sunlight glinting off its
hull, a drop-ship was coming in right on top of them. A second was dropped
down not five hundred metres away, and there were two more besides,
falling like giant beetles out of the sky.
They were standard pattern Imperial Guard landers. Bug-nosed, bulkmade
delivery ships. The Imperial Guard. He’d been praying to the Saint for
deliverance. What kind of answer was this?
Udol felt the ground shake as the first drop-ship zeroed, bouncing hard on
its hydraulic landing struts. Men leapt out of the drop-ship’s opening hatches.
Men in black fatigues and body armour. Men wrapped in camouflage capes.
Guardsmen. They were spreading out into the barrens of the obsidae, laying
down a fire pattern against the advancing hostiles, facing them down, and the
damn stalk-tanks too. The dust-filled air was thick with rapid las-fire.
Udol got to his feet in time to see the closest stalk-tank re-aim and fire on
the first drop-ship as it dusted off again. The impact slewed the nose round
hard and made the engines wail with protest, but it lifted clear, right over his
head, gear still down and hatches still wide open.
There was a puff of smoke from the newcomers’ hasty file and a rocket
spat at the first stalk-tank. Another followed it. A fireball bloomed around
the tank’s forebody, and it came to a standstill, its leg frame rocking back and
forth. It hesitated, took another step, and another rocket smacked it in the
snout. A blast-flash lit the glass field for a moment, and when it was gone, so
had the stalk-tank, and hot fragments of Chaos-fashioned engineering were
raining down out of the smoke.
Udol tried to raise his men on the vox, but an alien signal washed through
the channel. He only caught snatches of it. Something like “…fething waiting
for?” followed by “…live forever!”
He ran forward, rousing his men. The Guard had the phalanx of raiders on
the turn. Another fireball briefly lit the sky, bright like a rising sun. A second
stalk-tank had gone up.
The air was full of ashy debris. Through it, the soldiers in black poured
forward, guns crackling, only half-visible in the haze.
They were like ghosts, Udol thought.
Whoever they were, they seemed insufferably pleased with themselves. As
Udol approached, the black-clad troopers were whooping congratulatory
exchanges as they jogged back to recover the heavy packs and bergens they’d
ditched in haste as they’d come out of the landers. The hostiles, those few
that had survived, had fled away into the dusty distance of the obsidae. The
third and last stalk-tank was a burning mass on the glass field. Corpses in red
uniforms littered the ground.
Udol tried to identify, an officer amongst the Guardsmen. These men
seemed to have no disclosing marks except a dagger-thrust skull pin and the
aquila of the Imperial Guard. Their faces were hidden by crude, bulk-issue
rebreather masks.
“Are your boys okay?” asked a deep voice from behind him.
Udol turned. The man addressing him was big and broad, the unruly tufts
of a thick black beard emerging around the edges of his mask. His accent was
strange.
“What did you say?” Udol asked.
“Your boys. I was asking after them. You were in a bit of a spot there.”
“We—” Udol began. He didn’t quite know what to say. “You came in on
drop-ships,” was all he could come up with.
The big stranger jerked a thumb at the sky. We’ve been stacked orbital for
the last sixteen hours, then we got the word to go to landers, for which
everyone gave thanks. So, we’re on the way down and the word comes up
there’s an attack and we gotta abort the drop. Feth that I say, “sides it was too
late for going back, if you know what I mean. We spied the LZ from way up,
then we spied the feth-stonn—”
“The what?”
“The shooty-shooty. Friends in trouble, says I, so we wriggle out of the
pattern and fall in where, as it might be, we could be most advantageous.”
“You… you dropped into the firefight rather than the LZ?” asked Udol.
“Yes, we did. I see it as an economy of effort, myself. If we were going to
drop anyways, we might as well drop for a purpose. And so we did. Fething
good thing too. By the way, who are you?”
Udol gazed at the gloved hand held out to him. “Major Erik Udol, Third
Company, Regiment Civitas Beati.”
“Clearly pleased and all that, Udol. Pardon me but this old wardog’s still
riding the combat high. Got my boys here boisterous too. Too many months in
a belly hold, too little killing. This is Herodor, eh? Heard so fething much
about it.”
“Do you know…” Udol began. “Do you know how counter-regs it is to
drop troop landers into the path of an assault?”
The big stranger paused, as if thinking about this. “Fairly sure the answer
to that is ‘yes’. Do you know how effective it is to drop-assault an ongoing
ground attack? Or would you rather not live forever?”
“I—”
“See for yourself,” the stranger said, extending a big arm in a wide
gesture. “Observe the debris, the pleasant lack of incoming fire, and the arses
of many enemies fleeing for safety. Was there something else, major?”
“Who are you?”
“Colonel Corbec, Tanith First-and-Only.”
“Oh,” said Udol, understanding at last. “The Tanith. You’re the ones. The
ones she’s been waiting for.”
Corbec’s impromptu relief force, four platoons strong, assembled itself into
vaguely ordered groups at the edge of the fight zone. Word was the officer in
charge of the local force had voxed tactical logistical command to request
transports to take them into the city proper.
Major Rawne of the Tanith Ghosts, ranking third officer beneath Gaunt and
commander of third platoon, wandered away from the makeshift assembly
point and stood alone, slowly turning in a circle to take in the scene This was
his first look at Herodor, a world that had taken them months of monotonous
travel to reach. A world, so he understood, that contained a great miracle.
It was not a pretty place, and didn’t look at all miraculous, but it had a sort
of cold beauty, Rawne conceded. The sky was a flat, bright white, with the
merest smudges of grey-blue along the horizon, particularly in the north,
where dirty crusts of rock pushed up into the air. The ground around them —
an obsidae, the locals called it — was a bare field of blue dust, littered with
black volcanic glass. The thin air was cold, and abrasively dry. Rawne had
been told most of Herodor was an arctic desert: a dry, sub-zero waste of dust
fields, glass crags and crumbling escarpments. It reminded him, unpleasantly,
of death, of the cold, desiccated, brittle truth contained in all tombs. The
Ghosts had yet to go to a world that did not cost them life and blood. What
price was Herodor going to demand? Whose last sight would be these
forlorn wastes?
Any of us, he thought. All of us. Death is never choosy, never selective. On
Aexe Cardinal, he’d come to within touching distance of death himself. He
sensed that cold grasp was still on him, reluctant to let him go again.
Or maybe that was just the chill wind gusting in across the obsidae.
Rawne’s slow circle of contemplation brought him up at last looking south
at the city itself. The Civitas Beati, the city of the saint, a minor shrine, just
another of the many places and many worlds touched by Sabbat thousands of
years earlier and made holy. It was a sprawling place the main population
centre on Herodor. Three slab-like hive towers of white ashlar stood like
bodyguards around a higher, older, darker central steeple, encircled by
sloping skirts of lower level habs, manufactories, transitways and brick
viaducts. To the west lay the tinted domes of the many agriponic farms that
fed the city, farms that were themselves kept alive by the hot mineral springs
on which the city had been founded.
That’s what made it a special place, Rawne thought pragmatically. It
wasn’t who might have been here or what they might have done. This city
was here only by the grace of the thermal water that gushed up through the
cold crust of the world in this one place.
Rawne heard someone shout his name. The shout was muffled by a
rebreather mask. He turned and saw Mkoll, the regiment’s chief scout,
jogging over to him.
“Mkoll?”
“Transport’s here, sir.”
There was an aqueduct at the edge of the obsidae, and a string of battered
carriers was rolling out from under the arches.
“Let’s get everybody moving,” Rawne told the chief scout.
By the time the two of them rejoined the main group, the Ghosts were
boarding the waiting transports. Mkoll checked his own platoon had their
equipment stowed. He looked over and saw Sergeant Soric of five platoon,
who seemed to be taking his time getting settled with his men. Mkoll ran
across to him. The last of five were finding their places in the carrier’s rear
payload bay. Soric, the old rogue, was studying a piece of paper.
“Everything all right?” Mkoll asked him.
Soric looked up, as if Mkoll had made him jump. He balled up the piece of
paper, a scrap of blue tissue, and tossed it away. “Everything’s fine!” he told
Mkoll, and then reached up to the tailgate so the nearest men could help haul
his bulk up into the truck.
Mkoll thumped twice on the rear bodywork and the carrier started away in
a splutter of exhaust and over-revved engine. He turned back towards his
own transport.
The ball of blue paper blew across his path, carried by the wasteland
wind across the flinty shards of the glass field. Mkoll stooped and caught it.
It was torn from a despatch pack, one of the flimsy blank forms for written
messages if the vox was down. Soric’s vox was fine, wasn’t it?
Mkoll unfolded the paper. A single line was handwritten there: Trouble
before you even reach the ground.
What in the name of Terra, Mkoll wondered, did that mean?
TWO
THE GIRL FROM THE HILLS
“That which was will be.
That which dieth will live. That which falleth will rise up.
This, I say to you, is the nature of things,
if you but once believe.”
—Saint Sabbat, Epistles
He stood on one of the highest decks of the inner hive and looked down over
the sprawl of Beati City, across the ceramite and white-ashlar slopes of the
hive towers, the mosaic of brick-tile rooftops lower down, crosscut by the
lines of boulevards and viaducts, the mouldering stone of the old districts,
the stained metal sides of the processors and agriponic domes, the maze of
alleys and slums, the warrens of low-rise habs.
Not a secure town. Not secure or securable. There were no curtain walls
or encircling fortifications, except the natural bowl of rocky headlands
around the valley site. There was a shield system, generated by pylon
stations around the city limits which, along with main sequence masts on the
roofs of the hive towers, could raise a coherent energy field like a carnival
marquee above the city. But the shield system had been designed to ward off
dust storms and glass blizzards, not munitions.
And that was what was coming. Full-scale war, drawn inexorably towards
Herodor as surely as the pilgrim flocks had been drawn. The Civitas Beati
would not survive. It hadn’t been constructed for war, and he didn’t know
how he would begin to defend it. He thought of Vervunhive — great, solid
Vervunhive — and how hard that had been to hold on to. Vervunhive had
been designed by military planners with principles of defence uppermost in
their minds. Its Main Spine and curtain walls had formed a solid fortress
within which the entire hive population could shelter during times of attack
and siege. Beati City, in contrast, had simply grown, spilling low-rent, lowrise
habs out further and further from its more modest and overcrowded hive
towers.
God-Emperor, but this was going to be fething bloody.
Gaunt turned from the tinted observation window and scribbled some
more notes down on the data-slate he’d kept at his side since arriving, every
last idea he had to make the city as proof against assault as possible.
Stronger shield generators, for a start. Mobile artillery batteries, and some
real armour. Reinforcements, naturally. The damnably wide boulevards
would have to be blocked, and the aqua system managed. Food and power
and munitions had to be stockpiled. According to the last Navy report, the
Munitorum fleet was two days out, and a three regiment force, including
armour, was inbound from Khan. Herodor needed battlefleet cover too, and
he’d put in a request, through channels, for assistance from the Adeptus
Mechanicus, though no answer had yet come.
He heard the door to the wood-panelled deck open and presumed it was
Beltayn, returning at long last with caffeine and a snack. It wasn’t.
“Nice of you to decide to join me,” Gaunt said. Corbec grinned and
nodded. He was munching on a cut of bread filled with salt-meat, and carried
a hot cup of caffeine in his other hand. Rawne, coming in behind him, carried
two more cups and handed one to Gaunt.
“We intercepted Beltayn on the way in,” Rawne said.
“There was supposed to be food too,” said Gaunt. Corbec stopped
chewing immediately and looked down at the cut in his hand guiltily. “Sorry,”
he said.
Gaunt shook his head dismissively. “Take seats. You’ve had a busy day, as
I understand it.”
“Couldn’t just leave ’em to fly out there. It was a pretty major assault,
worst they’ve had, so I’m told,” said Corbec. Both he and Rawne had dust
adhering to their uniforms, and Corbec’s face still displayed the ruddy
pressure marks where his rebreather mask had cut into his skin.
“Armour?”
“Three stalk-tanks. Light stuff, but even so. Caff and Feygor messed them
up good with a brace of tread-fethers. More particularly, we got a positive
ID.” He reached into his musette bag and pulled out a snarling iron visor. There
was a las-hole in the middle of the mask’s forehead.
“Feth,” said Gaunt.
“The Blood Pact are here. In big numbers.”
Gaunt gestured to the iron visor Corbec was holding. “It could just be—”
“I’d know the fethers anywhere,” said Rawne.
Gaunt nodded. “The local military seems to think the raids are down to
some heretic-dissident cells. They’ve been hitting the city for the last four
days.” He took the mask from Corbec’s hand “They have no idea, have
they?”
“About time they did,” said Corbec.
Gaunt put the mask down. “I think we’re dealing with an advanced unit
ordered to keep us busy until the main force arrives.”
“And you think that main force is inbound?”
Gaunt laughed darkly at Rawne’s question. “Find me someone in this
sector who doesn’t know what’s happening here! If you were the enemy—”
“If?” smiled Rawne.
“If you were the enemy,” Gaunt continued, passing over the jibe,
“wouldn’t you consider this world a primary target?”
Rawne looked at Corbec, who simply shrugged. “So… any sign of this
impending doom?”
Gaunt shook his head again. “Fleet has nothing. Too many pilgrim ships
confusing the picture.”
“Forget what might be. What about an operational base for the ones
already here?” asked Rawne.
“Orbital surveys found what might be some landers in a deep glass desert
a thousand kilometres west of here, but there were no life readings. The
active hostiles here on Herodor are well hidden. Probably in the range of
volcanic uplands called the Stove Hills, but that’s just conjecture.”
“I say we—” Rawne started.
“We haven’t got the manpower, Rawne. It’d take us weeks to find them,
even with our skills. This is a big, bleak world with a lot of corners and
holes to hide in.”
“But not an important world,” said Rawne darkly.
“No, major,” agreed Gaunt. “Not an important world at all.”
“Then why—” Rawne began, and stopped dead when he saw the look in
Gaunt’s eyes.
“Have you… seen her?” Rawne said instead.
“Not yet.”
“You said the pilgrim ships were confusing things,” Corbec said. “There
are plenty of pilgrims here already. Hundreds of thousands. Orbital space is
thick with them.”
“More ships arriving all the time,” Gaunt said. “Some have come from
beyond the subsector.”
“Probably should stop them,” Corbec ventured. “I mean, we have to get
this place locked tight. Can’t just have anyone wandering in, even if they are
harmless happy-dappies. Remember on Hagia, the way they came in with the
pilgrim traffic?”
“I remember, Colm. I just don’t know how we stop it. Some of these ships
are old, barely serviceable and woefully unsupplied. If we try to form a
picket and turn them away, we’ll be consigning Imperial citizens to their
deaths. Tac logis here tells me that ninety per cent of the pilgrim ships would
not survive the return voyage. In most cases, they’ve spent their last savings
on a one-way trip here. A trip to salvation.”
Corbec set down his empty cup and brushed crumbs off his tunic. “The
poor, sorry bastards,” he said bitterly.
Gaunt shrugged. “The whole cluster and beyond knows what’s happening
here on Herodor, so you can bet the enemy does too. I can’t begin to imagine
why the information was released publicly.”
“Because she insisted,” said a voice behind him. Rawne had left the door
open and no one had heard the newcomer walk in. They leapt to their feet and
saluted.
“At ease,” said Lord General Lugo.
“I was told to report to you at 1700, sir,” said Gaunt.
“I know. I finished up earlier than expected and thought I’d move things
along. Welcome to Herodor, Gaunt.”
“Thank you, lord general.”
Lugo glanced at Corbec and Rawne. “Perhaps a moment alone…?” he
suggested.
“Of course.” Gaunt turned to the others and waved them out. “Dismissed,
you two. Get the regiment settled.”
Corbec and Rawne hastened from the room and closed the door behind
them.
“Feth,” whispered Corbec as soon as he was outside. “I had hoped we’d
never see that bastard again.”
“Not as much as Gaunt had, I’ll be bound,” said Rawne.
“I suggest, if I may, man to man,” said Lugo, “that we put all previous
unpleasantness behind us.” Lugo was a tall, bony individual with thin, greasy
skin that dung like parchment to the curves of his shaved skull. He wore a
stark white dress uniform, the chest covered in medals.
“That might be advantageous, sir,” said Gaunt.
“Things were said on Hagia, Gaunt. Deeds were done. You redeemed your
reputation and abilities in my eyes with that little excursion to the Shrinehold.
So… say no more about it, that’s my motto.”
Gaunt nodded. He found it difficult to answer. Lord General Lugo was, in
his opinion, one of the most inept and self-aggrandising officers in the
Crusade’s upper command echelon, a political animal rather than a military
leader. In 770, he had negotiated for himself command of the liberation of the
shrineworld Hagja, believing it to be a simple task that would win him much
glory and bolster his political ambitions. When the liberation effort went
disastrously wrong, he had blamed Gaunt and tried to make the Tanith First’s
commander carry the can. In doing so, he nearly lost the entire shrineworld to
Chaos, a calamity only averted by the Tanith during the peculiar happenings
at the Shrinehold itself. After Hagia, his slate clean, Gaunt had been
transferred with his forces to the Phantine theatre. Lugo, though not actually
disgraced, had remained on Hagia as Imperial Governor, his ambitions in
tatters.
Sadly, that meant he had been in exactly the right place to benefit from the
extraordinary events that then took place there. His star was now in the
ascendant again. He was, by default in control of what might prove to be the
most influential part of the entire Imperial interest in the Sabbat Worlds.
Rumours were already spreading that Lugo could be looking to replace
Macaroth as Warmaster if the current stagnation continued. He was very
much the coming man.
Gaunt could almost smell that confidence and ambition on the lord general.
It was actually the smell of hair tonic and cologne, but to Gaunt such
pampering scents were the same thing. Lugo had his sights on power. Real
power. It gave him an appetite so great you could almost hear his stomach
growling.
And it was absolutely obvious that the last thing Lugo wanted in his path
was Ibram Gaunt who had shamed him so on Hagia.
“Why is there a smile on your face, Gaunt?”
Gaunt shrugged. “No reason, my lord. Just pleased that things can be
square between us.” No reason indeed. Gaunt was smiling because, for the
first time since he’d received his orders on Aexe Cardinal, he was pleased to
be on Herodor.
As he understood it he was only here because she had requested it. Lugo
would never have sent for Gaunt. Whoever — whatever — she was, she had
clout. She was in charge here, really in charge, and Lugo was forced to obey
her will. Lugo and his tacticians were taking her seriously. Either that, or
Lugo’s capacity for intrigue was so great Gaunt couldn’t even begin to see its
devious mechanisms.
“You say she insisted that word of her return be broadcast?” Gaunt asked.
Lugo nodded. He had stalked over to the window and was staring out at
the city as the first shrouds of evening began to fall across the scene. “She
would not have it kept secret no matter how strenuously my advisors
objected. She cannot… as I understand it… see why her return should be
kept from common knowledge. She calls herself an instrument, Gaunt. An
instrument of the Golden Throne She embodies a power and a purpose for the
good of Mankind. Kept secret, she has no power or purpose at all. It makes a
certain sense.”
“It makes her vulnerable. It makes this world and this… forgive my
candor… feeble city vulnerable.”
Lugo watched the city lights as they came on in the covering darkness. A
wind from the wastes had picked up and pattered glass flecks against the
thick window pane. “It does. It does indeed.”
“Then why here, sir? Why this backwater? Surely her power and purpose
could be put to better use at the vanguard of the crusade. With the Warmaster
on Morlond, for example?”
Lugo turned from the window. He was smiling now. “It pleases me no end
to hear you speak this way, Gaunt. It agrees entirely with my thinking. She
should not be here. We must persuade her to… relocate.”
“Of course,” said Gaunt, “though this all presumes she is what she says
she is.”
Lugo’s expression suddenly darkened. “You don’t believe?”
“I—” Gaunt began.
Lugo took a step forward. “If you don’t believe, I can scarcely see the
point of you being here.”
“I remain to be convinced, lord general.”
“You what? You’re talking like a damned heretic, Gaunt.”
“No, sir. I—”
“Saint Sabbat has been reincarnated. She is made flesh so that she might
lead us to victory here in the worlds that bear her name. This is a moment
undreamt of in human history! A moment of sacred wonder! And you remain
to be convinced?”
Gaunt opened his mouth and then closed it again. He met the lord general’s
hard stare.
“I think it’s high time you met her,” said Lugo. “Either that, or it’s high time
I had you burned at the stake.”
On a cold, forlorn night just like the one presently bearing down on the
Civitas Beati, but six thousand years earlier, the Saint had left her mark on
Herodor. The Civitas Beati hadn’t been called that then. It was but a single
colony tower, the basis of what would one day become Old Hive, the central
hive steeple, and back then it was called Habitat Alpha (colonial). The Saint,
at the head of her flotsam cavalcade of an army, a host made up of colonial
regiments, armed pilgrim retinues, a commandery of the Sisters Militant later
to form the Order of Our Martyred Lady, and an echelon of the now extinct
Astartes Chapter the Brazen Skulls, had bested and driven off a Chaos force
at Grace Gorge, and she had come to Habitat Alpha to cleanse her wounds.
She and her chosen bathed in the thermal springs and made them blessed for
all time. The next morning, the Saint’s host arose, refreshed, and annihilated
the renewed thrust of the Chaos force in the Battle of the Shard Valley where,
it was said, she alone disposed of eighteen hundred enemy warriors,
including their Archon, Marak Vore.
It was all in the annals, and the storybooks. Gaunt had known them since
childhood. Under Slaydo, he had committed them to memory.
The Balneary Shrine where Sabbat had washed her wounds lay in the
lowest depths of Old Hive. It was constructed from black basalt and lit only
by electro-candles and biolumin globes. Attendants and shrine priests hurried
out as Lugo, with his chief staffers and life company troopers, approached
down the long stone corridor. The air was hot and damp, and smelled of
sulphur and iron.
They reached the doorway. “We will wait here,” Lugo said. “All of us,” he
added, looking pointedly at Surgeon Curth, whom Gaunt had summoned to
join him before following the lord general into the depths of the hive tower.
Curth caught Gaunt’s eye and he nodded.
“Stay here I’ll call if I want you.”
Gaunt stepped through the heavy doors, and they closed behind him. It was
dim and quiet, and the close air was dogged with steam rising from the deepcut
bathing pools. A narrow staircase of a hundred steps cut from gleaming
white limestone led down from the doorway, thousands of electrocandles
lining the edges of the flight. The candlelight reflected off the slowly lapping
water below. To the east lay the Chapel of the Emperor, to the west the
votive chapel of the Saint. Gaunt went down the pale, polished steps, and
took off his cap. He was sweating already. He walked to the side of the main
bath, and stared down at his chopped reflection in the rust-stained water. The
water rose from an aquifer deep beneath the city, broiled and heated by the
volcanic vents in the crust. It was said to heal all wounds. Along the edge of
the bath, Gaunt could see hundreds of brass spoons, cups and ladles that
were used by the faithful to drink or baptise or cleanse themselves. Deep in
the pool, shimmering, he saw millions of coins and blades, badges, medals
and other offerings.
He knelt down at the poolside, plucked off a glove, and ran his bare
fingers through the warm water.
There was a splash on the far side of the bathing pool, and ripples circled
across towards him. He looked up in time to see a pale figure rising from the
water, its back to him. It was a woman, dad in a simple white shift. She came
up the bath’s side steps, dripping, the wet linen sticking to her body, and he
averted his gaze Two shrine adepts emerged from the steam and draped her
in a long, grey robe. She pulled it close, and brought the hood up over her
head.
Then she turned, facing Gaunt across the water of the sacred balneary.
“Ibram.”
He looked up. “You know my name?”
“Of course.” Her voice was soft and breathy. He longed to see her face. A
sweet scent reached his nostrils as if the departing adepts had thrown incense
on the lamp flames. Islumbine, that was it The smell of islumbine, sacred
flower of the Saint.
“I’m glad you’re here,” she said.
“I came because I was told to come,” Gaunt said. “I was ordered.”
She folded her arms, facing him across the steaming pool.
“You can stand up, if you like. You don’t have to bow.”
He rose, slowly.
“I requested you. I requested the Tanith Ghosts. It pleases me that Gaunt’s
Ghosts are here with me on Herodor.”
The voice was so sweet. So penetrating. It was almost as if he already
knew it.
“Why us?” Gaunt asked.
“Because of what you did on Hagia. You and your men put up their lives to
vouchsafe my remains against the archenemy. You defended the Shrinehold to
the last. It is only right I ask for you here, now, to protect me as you did
before I want the Ghosts to be my inner circle. My honour guard.”
“We will not shrink from that task,” Gaunt said. He took a few steps and
began to move around the side of the pool. “I had a… well, I don’t know
what it was. I had a vision on Aexe Cardinal that this would come to pass. A
woman six millennia dead told me to find you here.”
“Really?” she said, as if thinking for a moment. “That is good. That is as I
intended it to be.”
“Did you?”
“Of course.”
He took another step closer. “You intended that? That vision of the
sororitas? You created that chapel in the woods out of nothing?”
“Of course, Ibram.”
“I believed that. It was real. Beltayn and I, we were totally convinced by
it. We felt… touched by a strangeness beyond our power to explain.” He took
a step closer. She began to back away slightly.
“Not like now,” he added.
“Ibram, you alarm me. What is this agitation in you? Why do you approach
me?”
“Because I want to see your face.”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“Because—”
“I want to see your face because I know your voice!”
He lunged at her and grabbed her. She thrust out a hand and pushed his
face aside, but he shook it off and yanked back her hood.
“I know your voice,” he said again, as she fought to break free.
“Sanian.”
Sanian pulled away from him and dragged her robe tight. She stared at him
with eyes he couldn’t fathom.
“You don’t believe.”
Gaunt took a step back and shook his head, laughing out loud. “I wanted to.
Oh, believe me, I wanted to. Five months in a transit ship, waiting to see the
truth? I’ve longed for this moment since Slaydo first explained the mysteries
of Sabbat to me. I expected all sorts of things… truth, lies, fantasies. But not
you, Sanian.”
She glared at him. Her black hair fell in wet ringlets around her beautiful
face. It had grown long since he’d last seen her, a far cry from the shaved
scalp and braid she’d worn as an esholi student. “Understand this, Ibram. I’m
not Sanian.”
“You are. I know you. You were the esholi who guided my men to the
Shrinehold. Milo still talks about you.”
The look in her eyes changed suddenly and unnerved him. “Oh, Ibram. Of
course I am Sanian. My flesh is, at least. I needed a vessel, and she was the
right one She was a sweet girl and she gave her flesh to me I look like
Sanian. I sound like her. But I am not her. I am Sabbat. The girl from the hills
of Hagia, reborn into this fragile body.”
“No…”
“Answer me this, Ibram. How else might I come back? How else might I
find flesh to clothe me?”
He shook his head. “This is a trick. Lugo is using you. You’re not my
Saint.”
Gaunt strode out into the corridor outside the balneary and Lugo’s party stood
back to let him pass.
“Well?” asked Lugo.
Gaunt stared at Lugo for a moment. “It doesn’t matter what I believe does
it?”“
Why?”
“Because as far as the Imperium is concerned, as far as hundreds of
thousands of pilgrims are concerned… and as far as the archenemy is
concerned… we have a reincarnated saint here on Herodor. And that’s all
that matters.”
Lugo grinned. “At last Gaunt, you’re grasping the idea.”
Gaunt marched away from the balneary and the lord general’s retinue, and
headed down the long, stone colonnade that led to the nearest elevator bank.
The attendants from the balneary, the hierarchs and adepts who had
withdrawn from the place at Lugo’s approach, were waiting quietly in the
colonnade, silent robed figures in the gloom. He pushed through their
huddled groups, knowing they were all watching him.
“Gaunt! Gaunt!” Curth called as she ran after him. He didn’t break stride.
When she finally caught up with him, he was waiting outside the iron cage
door of the elevator for a lift car to arrive.
“You want to tell me what’s going on?” she snapped.
He looked at her, his eyes in shadow. “Ever have a secret, Curth? One that
will hurt as many by telling it as it will by keeping it?”
“Yes,” she said honestly, the thought of Gol Kolea flashing through her
mind.
He seemed surprised at her reply, as if he’d been expecting her to say no.
“How did you decide?”
“I didn’t. It was decided for me.”
“That’s what I’m afraid will happen here.” The mechanically wound
elevator car clanked and moaned to a halt, and he wrenched open the
collapsible cage door. Curth had to leap in after him to stop him closing the
cage in her face. For a moment, she thought he was going to pull the cage
open again and order her out. Instead, he walked to the wall panel and pulled
on the brass lever. The elevator began to rise, gears whirring in the blackness
of the shaft.
“Did you see her?” she asked, watching the lights of passing floors slide
down his face.
“I saw her.”
“And it’s put you in this mood?”
He let out a slow, dangerous breath and looked like he might punch
something.
“You asked me to help you, Gaunt. You said you needed proof to put your
mind at rest.” She patted the equipment satchel slung over her shoulder. “I
brought the bio-scanner. Did you not need proof after all?”
“Apparently not,” he said.
“It’s not her, is it?” Curth asked. Gaunt said nothing. With a sigh, she
leaned over and pulled the brass lever down to suspend motion. The elevator
clanked to a halt between floors. Somewhere, a buzzer rang. An amber light
began to flash on the control panel.
“Talk to me,” she said.
“Let it alone, please, surgeon.”
Curth shook her head. “I’ve watched you, Ibram. All the way from Aexe
Cardinal, ever since the news broke. Part of you wants it to be her, part of
you is afraid it won’t be. Know what I thought? I thought the moment you saw
her, you’d be sure. Just like that No need for me to do a gene procedure to get
the answer for you. I knew you’d know. And you do.”
“I do.”
“It’s not her.”
“It’s not.”
“Throne!” she gasped, then recovered her train of thought “So what is this?
Disappointment? Anger? You came here needing proof one way or the other,
and you’ve got it That at least should satisfy you.”
“Do you remember Sanian?”
She shrugged. “No, I… oh, wait. Hagian girl, a student… esholi, that’s
what they were called, wasn’t it? She went along with Corbec’s mob.”
“That’s her.” He stared at her.
Her eyes widened. “You are fething kidding me, Gaunt! Her? She’s the
Saint?”
“Far as I can tell, Sanian believes she is the reincarnation of Sabbat. She’s
quite lucid, and convincing, I would imagine, to someone who didn’t know
her already. She needs psychiatric treatment in an Imperial asylum. But her
potential value has been recognised. Her value as propaganda.”
“By Lugo?”
“You can see how delighted he is his career’s back on track. He doesn’t
care if she’s real or not All he cares about is the fact that she’s convincing.
The crusade needs a miracle right now… and he’s the one who’s going to be
remembered forever as the man who made that miracle happen.”
She reached out tentatively and chaffed his shoulder reassuringly. “So, tell
the truth. As a servant of the God-Emperor, you’ve always been honest to a
fault.”
“It’s not that simple. She is strategically valuable, there’s no getting away
from that. As an icon, a rallying point, she could win this war for us. Her
presence could bolster our morale and destroy the enemy’s resolve. If she
continues to play the part, and we all go along with it and say we believe, we
could liberate the entire cluster. But I don’t think I can lie about something
like this. Not to Zweil… not to Corbec and Dorden and Daur and the others
who were touched by the Saint on Hagia. They believed in a truth there, a
truth that I felt too. I can’t ask them to believe this lie instead.”
“Let them make their own minds up,” she said.
“Ah, there you are,” said Corbec, looking up from the data-slate he had been
riddling with. “You’ll be pleased to know we’re settling in. Billets are fine.
I’ve got a list of their locations here, if you want.”
Gaunt ignored the slate Corbec held out to him.
“Or maybe you don’t. Anyway, we’re getting the lie of the land. Rawne
and Mkoll are out there right now, deploying platoons around the city
perimeter. We got about nineteen in the field, setting up waystations in
cooperation with the local militia. It won’t be much, but by dawn we should
have a basic defence established around the north and east flanks of the city.
The locals add about twelve thousand to the numbers, along with medium
armour, and the lord general’s landing force has about a thousand more, plus
light armour and some special weapons units.”
“Where’s Milo?”
“Milo?” Corbec furrowed his brow and scrolled down the disposition
lists on his slate. “Right now, I’d say he was out with his platoon at the
Glassworks. That’s… ah… up in the north-west sector.”
Gaunt nodded. “Get on the vox and get him back here.”
“Well, they’re due for return rotation to the billets at ten tomorrow and—”
“Now please, colonel.”
“Right. Yes, sir.”
Gaunt walked past him into the wide, vaulted chamber on the eightieth
level of the third hive tower where the Tanith First had set up their
operations post The wide room, with shuttered windows on two sides, was
busy with regiment personnel, working with members of the Regiment
Civitas Beati and tech-adepts from the regular Herodian PDF to set up maincaster
vox stations, tactical superimpositionals and relay nodes. Power
cables and data-flexes snaked across the floor. Technicians were wiring up
the portable comm-desks and holo-chart tables.
“Is he all right?” Corbec asked Girth, who had followed Gaunt into the
room.
“Not really,” she said.
Gaunt turned and looked back at Corbec. “What’s through here?” he asked,
gesturing to a side arch into another room.
Corbec hastened over to join him. “Just an annexe. Daur thought it might
do as a briefing room. The Munitorum’s bringing chairs up, and a few tables.
Beltayn’s organised some food too. Down the hall on the left, plenty of grub
for—”
Gaunt cut him off. “Two minutes. I want you, Dorden, Zweil and Daur in
the annexe for a privy briefing. Hark too, if he’s around.”
Corbec shrugged and nodded. “As you ask, sir.”
They took their seats. Corbec; the old ayatani priest Zweil; Captain Ban
Daur, the Verghastite third officer; Dorden, the chief medic and Viktor Hark,
the regiment’s commissar. Curth slipped in and sat at the back. Before he sat
down, Daur configured and activated the portable confidence screen that
would generate electroference patterns to keep the meeting private.
“What I’ve got to say doesn’t leave this room,” said Gaunt.
The men nodded. Curth, at the back, folded her arms and hunched her
shoulders.
“I’ve met the Saint,” said Gaunt.
“Praise be!” Zweil murmured.
Hark had a sick look on his face that indicated he knew what must be
coming next.
“She isn’t real.”
There was a long silence. Corbec stared blankly at the wall opposite him.
Daur groaned and put his head in his hands, ringers wrapped with a green
silk faith ribbon. Dorden closed his eyes and folded one hand around the
other. Zweil blinked.
“She… I’m sorry, what?” Zweil said.
“She is a fake. An invention. A subterfuge.”
“Oh, feth…” sighed Corbec.
“Seriously?” Daur asked. His eyes were welling up.
“More particularly,” Gaunt said, “she is known to us. To you, Colm, and
you Dorden, and Daur too. As far as I can tell, she truly believes she is
Sabbat incarnate. But when I met her, face to face, I realised it was the poor
girl we’d met on Hagia: Sanian.”
“Sanian?” Corbec started.
“No, no… this… no, this isn’t right,” Zweil said, agitated. “The Saint has
come back, the Beati. This is what we were told. She is here…”
“She isn’t. It’s… a scam,” said Gaunt.
“Absolutely not!” Zweil cried, and got up.
“Father… father, please. I understand this is hard for you to hear.”
“It is her! It has to be!” Zweil had become so upset that Dorden and Curth
had both risen to their feet. “This is the Saint returned, not some esholi child
with her head all messed up!”
“I believe,” said Hark, slowly pulling on his black leather gloves, “that
Zweil ought to know. He is an ayatani of the Beati Cult, after all.”
Gaunt shot a dangerous look in Hark’s direction. “She isn’t real,” he
repeated.
“She was on Hagia,” said Dorden, his arm around Zweil’s shoulders. He
was staring at Gaunt. “She spoke to me.”
“I know she did, Tolin,” said Gaunt.
“She spoke to me too,” said Daur.
“And me, boss,” said Corbec.
“I know, Colm. I fully believe that on Hagia you and Ban and Tolin… and
others too… had a communication from the Saint that drove you to do what
you did. All I’m saying is… this isn’t the Saint. Not here. Not now.”
“But—” Daur began.
“Has she spoken to you since?” Gaunt asked.
The men were silent.
“Heretic! She spoke to you,” Zweil cried suddenly.
“What?”
“You… and Beltayn. On Aexe Cardinal. Through her servant.”
Gaunt closed his eyes, trying to master the anger that boiled inside him.
“Ayatani Zweil… I told you that in strictest confidence It was meant to
remain between just us. An act of confession, sacrosanct. I trusted you would
keep it to yourself.”
“Well, this is too important!” snapped Zweil. The bone-thin old priest
swayed, and for a moment Gaunt was afraid he was about to keel over.
“Devil take my vows, you’re lying about this and I won’t have it!”
“What’s he talking about, Gaunt?” asked Dorden.
“He’s speaking out of turn, doctor,” said Gaunt.
“He knows!” Zweil cried.
“I think you should tell us, sir,” said Corbec.
“This is hardly the time or—”
“Tell them!” Zweil screamed. “Tell them what you told me! Tell them what
made me believe!”
Gaunt looked from one face to the next slowly. He realised that, right then,
he didn’t have a friend in the room.
“All right. On Aexe, I took a trip from the frontline to Meiseq to meet with
Van Voytz. Beltayn was with me. Our train was delayed and we went on foot
for a while, and we found this chapel in the woods. There was an old woman
there She seemed to know us, and she warned me about Herodor, long before
the orders came through. Later, Beltayn and I tried to find the chapel again.
We… couldn’t and I can’t explain that.”
“Tell them the rest,” said Zweil.
“It’s not pertinent,” Gaunt said.
“It is! It speaks volumes! The woman they met identified herself, and later
they discovered she had died here on Herodor six thousand years ago!”
“That’s enough,” snarled Gaunt.
“Yes, it is,” said Zweil. “It’s enough. Enough proof by anyone’s standards.
The Saint told you to come here and serve her! How dare you deny her now!”
Gaunt took off his cap and sat down. Everyone was staring at him.
“I don’t know what happened in the woods on Aexe. It has been with me
ever since. I’m sorry I never told any of you about it. But it doesn’t change
the facts. The Saint here is not the Saint. She is a pretender.”
“And for the record,” Gaunt added, looking at Zweil, “I’m appalled by
your lack of confidence, father.”
“Oh, get over it!” Zweil spat. He shook Dorden’s arm off him. “Tell me
this, Ibram Gaunt… if this Saint is such an obvious fake, why did she request
you here? You, the one man who could expose her?”
Gaunt shrugged. “I don’t know the answer to that.”
“And if Lugo is really calling the shots,” added Corbec, “why would he let
that happen?”
“I don’t know,” said Gaunt.
“I know this,” said Hark, rising to his feet. “It doesn’t matter if she’s the
Saint or not. As far as millions, maybe billions, of Imperial citizens are
concerned, she is Sabbat reborn. Truth or lie, we have to uphold that, or
Imperial morale will collapse overnight.”
“I was getting to that part, Hark,” said Gaunt. “We have a duty here,
whether we like it or not…”
“To lie?” asked Dorden coldly.
“Even that,” said Gaunt.
Zweil let out a low moan and shuffled towards the door. He paused there
and looked back at Gaunt. “Why here?” he asked. “If it’s a lie, why the hell
here?”
Gaunt couldn’t answer him. Zweil paced out of the room, and Curth and
Dorden followed him in concern.
“Dismissed,” said Gaunt. Corbec and Daur both left, uneasily.
Gaunt looked at Hark. “I see your old master has been working on you.”
Hark shook his head. “Lugo? He’s not my—”
“Shut up, Viktor. Lugo placed you with the Tanith on Hagia. You were
meant to be my replacement. He—”
“No, Ibram. I was meant to be your judge and executioner. That was what
Lugo wanted of me. I’d like to think that I have proved myself to you and the
Ghosts since then. Yes, Lugo spoke to me when we arrived. I won’t lie. He
asked me to work on you. He thought you could persuade Sabbat to relocate
to Morlond. That would really do his cause no end of good.”
“I see. And?”
Hark smiled. “I told him you’d make your own mind up.”
Gaunt nodded.
“Zweil will calm down,” said Hark. “It’s in his nature to blow hot and
cold. What interests me is how right he was.”
“What do you mean, Viktor?”
“If this Saint Sabbat is a fake… why us… and why here?”
THREE
UNHOLY NIGHT
“Everyone has a choice. Me, I choose to not make a choice. What? What?
Why is that funny?”
—Hlaine Larkin, Ghost
If he’d learned anything about Herodor so far, it was that the nights were
fething cold. The city shield was lit, and for that they might be somewhat
thankful, but the wasteland wind, with a cutting edge like a chainsword, slid
in under the canopy of energy and bit them to the bone.
If Larkin had understood his sergeant’s pre-brief right the area the carriers
had dropped them off in was called the Glassworks, a ramshackle, two
thousand hectare arrangement of dingy workshops, storebarns and
manufactories in the northwest of the city. It seemed a long, long way from
anywhere nice. The main bulk of the Civitas, well-lit and cosy-looking, was
a good distance behind them. Here, the light of drumfires and phospha lamps
combined with the gauzy glow of the shield overhead to produce a blue,
submarine halflight.
Above, in the night sky, stars twinkled that were not stars. Those indistinct
pinpricks of light were the hundreds — possibly thousands — of pilgrim
ships that had swarmed to Herodor.
Larkin’s platoon, number eleven, had been sent to the Glassworks with ten
and twelve to secure that section of perimeter. Easy job, to say it. In practice,
it was hard to even find the perimeter in the first place. The whole area had
been overrun by pilgrims, and their tent towns had grown like forest fungus
between the empty buildings — inside some of them, in fact — and out into
the edges of the wasteland itself, beyond the limits of the crackling shield.
There was no definable edge to the city at all.
Weapons slung, uneasy, the Ghosts moved through the twilight world of the
camp. The pilgrim contingent was huddled around feeble fires, cooking late
meals or forming prayer circles. Infardi worshippers in green silk were
performing rituals around their clock shrines, or moving through the camp
passing out pamphlets. Many were tonsured or had their napes shaved, others
hugged placards or emblems of the Saint. The most extreme had pierced
themselves with the stigmata of the nine wounds, or inscribed holy tracts on
their skin. Some had whips or sticks to scourge themselves with. Every
single one displayed his or her pilgrim badge proudly, and every one looked
pinched and painfully cold.
“Keep it tight Larks,” Sergeant Obel called. Larkin hurried to catch up.
Just for the hell of it, he shouldered his long-las and panned the scope
around. Through the enhanced and magnifying viewfinder, he spot-picked
locations in the fuzzy cold of the obsidae beyond the camp. For one brief
second, he thought he glimpsed movement in the distance. Just wind blowing
the dust up. That’s all, he told himself. Not the enemy.
As far as Hlaine Larkin — the regiment’s finest marksman — was
concerned, the enemy wasn’t really out there anywhere. He was already
inside the city, inside with them.
And his name was Lijah Cuu.
Just five hundred metres from where Larkin was standing, in another part of
the straggled-out camp, Trooper Cuu raised his standard pattern lasrifle to
fire.
“Not another step, gak-head,” he hissed. “Or I’ll ventilate your torso, sure
as sure.”
“Put that up,” Sergeant Criid snapped, pushing past Cuu and jerking his
gun-muzzle skywards with an off-hand gesture. “Sir? Mister? I need you to
identify yourself.”
Anton Alphant turned and looked at her. He raised his arms so she could
see his hands were empty.
“I don’t mean any trouble, trooper,” he said.
“Sergeant,” she corrected, and moved forward to face him as her platoon
— the tenth — closed in behind her.
“My apologies, sergeant. It’s been a few years.”
“Since what?” she asked. Alphant liked her already. Sharp to the point of
brittle, fast-eyed, confident. A looker too, if you liked hard, thin girls. A little
beyond an old man like himself, of course.
“I was Guard. Years back. Sorry, that’s not important, is it?”
Criid shrugged. “We’ve been told to secure this area, sir. It’s okay if the
pilgrims keep to their camp areas, but we can’t have them moving around
after dark.”
“Because of the raiders?” he said.
She nodded. “You are a pilgrim, I suppose? You’ve got papers?”
Alphant affirmed with another quick nod, and then gently opened his robe
so she could see what his hands were doing at all times. He pulled out his
sheaf of certificates.
DaFelbe, Criid’s number two, a tall, thin, earnest young man, hurried
forward and examined Alphant’s papers with a handheld verity-reader.
“Anton Alphant,” DaFelbe called back. “Registered infardi pilgrim. Place
of origin, Khan II, place of birth—”
“Enough,” said Criid. She took the papers and walked over to face
Alphant. “Says here you were assigned camp space in the Ironhall district.
You’ve roamed a little too far.”
“I… I was looking for someone,” said Alphant.
“Who?”
“It’s not important now. I got sidetracked, I’m afraid. I was just going to
see if the doors on that manufactory were open. There are a lot young
children in this part of the camp and I was hoping to get them into shelter.”
“Why? Are you some kind of elected leader?”
“No, not at all. It’s just… the nights are cold.”
“Aren’t they just?” said Criid. “Hwlan?”
The tenth platoon scout hurried up.
Criid nodded to the empty building nearby. “Get that place open, please.
Some kids here who could do with shelter tonight.”
“On it,” Hwlan said.
“Nessa… watch his back,” Criid added, signing to the platoon sniper
Nessa Bourah scooped up her long-las and hurried after the scout.
“There was movement behind them, but it was just Sergeant Shogg,”
Domor and twelfth platoon closing up.
“See much?” asked Domor.
Criid chuckled at the unintended irony of his question. “You tell me.” His
bulbous, augmetic eyes were clicking and whirring as they scanned the
horizon.
“Not enough to spit on, Tona,” he said.
“Be thankful for that,” she said.
Back down the file of Ghosts, Brin Milo chaffed his cold hands and
looked into the distance.
“What the feth are those people doing?” he asked.
“Them there?” Nehn replied. “Keeping their fething balance, I’d say.”
Throughout the fire-lit sprawl of the pilgrim camp, as ubiquitous as the
bizarre clock shrines, thin towers rose up into space. Wood, mostly, some
steel, some stone on wheeled trolleys. On top of each one stood a pilgrim,
poised vulnerably on the summit of his or her thin pillar.
“Stylites,” said Corporal Chiria, as if she knew. She was a heavy-made
Verghastite, her plain face badly scarred by the last campaign they had gone
through. “Stylites, you know? They stand on top of plinths and pillars, Milo.”
“Uh…why?”
“Well,” considered Chiria, “I don’t exactly know.”
“Brings them closer to the Saint,” said a voice from behind them. “Proves
their faith.”
“Really, Gol?” asked Milo.
Gol Kolea set his lasrifle down and thought hard. It was painful to watch.
Gol Kolea had once been leader of tenth platoon, with a fine war record
behind him. Some said he was senior officer material. But on Phantine, two
years before, the spraying fragments of a loxatl flechette round had ripped
into his head and torn away his wits and his personality. It was a crying
shame, a real tragedy. Kolea seldom said more than a few words. His last
comment was a downright magnum opus.
“How do you know that, Gol?” asked Milo.
“Dunno,” said Kolea. He scratched at the side of his head. “Just is a
thing.”
“Oh, you know the sergeant,” said Cuu, sauntering up. He was the only
man who still referred to Kolea by his former rank. “Talks a lot of gak, don’t
you, gak-head? Eh? Eh? Sure as sure.”
“One day, Lijah,” said China, venomously, “someone’s gonna plant a lasround
straight between your eyes.”
“Uh huh. Who’d that be? You?” giggled Cuu. “You haven’t got the balls,
Chiria. Sure as sure.”
Milo turned to face Cuu and stared into his deep set, scar-cut face. “You
don’t stop mocking Kolea and I’ll do it myself, you understand?” Milo said.
Cuu grinned. “Whoo, careful, mascot. You’ll bust a seam!”
Milo dropped his lasrifle and balled his fists.
“Enough! That’s enough!” said Bonin, the twelfth platoon scout. He put
himself in between Milo and Cuu. “Milo… signals is asking after you.”
“Me?”
“Yes, you. Cuu. Go and be busy elsewhere.”
Cuu sniggered and wandered off.
“Not exactly homely,” Hwlan sniffed, looking around. The manufactory
interior was dark and empty, and smelled of woodrot, motor oil and ozone.
Nessa moved past him, scoping around with her long-las. DaFelbe advanced
with her, shining his lamp pack into the darker corners. There were holes in
the roof over their heads, and through them, they could see the shifting
luminescence of the city shield.
“It’s out of the wind, that’s the important thing,” said Alphant. “A few
drum fires in here and it’ll be almost cosy.”
“I guess,” said Hwlan.
“All right if I bring some of the families in?” Alphant asked Criid.
She nodded. “As many as there’s room for.”
In less than fifteen minutes, the place was teeming. The pilgrims dragged
belongings with them on barrows and litters, and some manhandled clock
shrines in through the doorway. Fires were laid. The pilgrims were singing a
slow, pastoral hymn as they settled themselves. Alphant moved amongst
them, helping them get comfortable. Criid watched him for a while. The man
might not claim to be a leader, but he had a natural, reassuring air of
command that the pilgrims all responded to. He was, however, clearly
preoccupied, and kept looking at the door as newcomers entered. Who was
he hoping to find in the Ironhall camp?
Criid was helping an elderly man find a corner to sit in. The old man had a
handcart loaded with crudely painted plaster busts of the Saint, undoubtedly
copied cheaply and in bulk using a fabric replicator, which he sold to the
faithful to keep himself in soup money. Once Criid got him bedded down on
his ragged mattress roll in a corner of the manufactory, he pressed one into
Criid’s hand.
“No, that’s all right.”
“Please.”
“Honestly, I have no money.”
“No, no,” the old man shook his head. “Not for money. It is my thanks for
your kindness.”
“Oh,” Criid looked at the plaster effigy. It was hideous. The paint had been
applied so badly and so clumsily that Saint Sabbat looked like a pre-teen
clangirl wannabe from Vervunhive who had just that morning discovered
cosmetics and applied them enthusiastically.
“Thank you,” Criid said, tucking the plaster bust into her jacket pocket. It
was a non-uniform garment, a fur-trimmed Shadik army field jacket that she’d
appropriated on Aexe Cardinal. She’d slit the insignia off. So far, no one had
brought her up for wearing it, and she was glad of the warmth.
“May the Saint bless you,” the old man said.
“Thanks for that too,” she added, but her attention wasn’t really on him.
She could hear raised voices coming from the factory entrance.
In the doorway, DaFelbe and Lubba were having an altercation with a tall
man dressed in the ornate demi-armour of the local military.
“…just have to get them out of here, then,” she heard the man say as she
walked up.
“Problem?” she asked.
The local turned to look at her. He was clad in brown synth-leather and his
torso and left arm were cased with segmented steel. Behind him were over a
dozen Herodian city troopers with bullnose carbines.
“Are you in charge?” he asked.
“Sergeant Criid, Tanith First,” she answered smoothly. With a flick of her
head, she signalled DaFelbe and Lubba to back off. Lubba seemed curiously
naked without his trademark flamer pack. Gakking city ordinances.
“Captain Lamm, Civitas Beati. This is an unauthorised use of civil
property. Get these lowlifes out of here.”
“No,” said Criid.
The captain bristled. “No?” he said.
“These people,” Criid emphasized the word, “needed shelter. This
building was not in use. Derelict in fact. This isn’t unauthorised because I
authorised it.”
“Use of property is a matter for the city council to decide. Did you break
the lock?”
“Not personally, but I take responsibility. Let’s be nice about this. Captain
Lamm. There’s no need for unpleasantness. We’re on the same side.”
From the look on Lamm’s face, he didn’t quite agree. His men shuffled,
edgy.
“Get these vagrants out of this building,” Lamm said, slowly and
deliberately.
Criid had one of the choicest and most vulgar replies of her life ready to
throw back at him, but a sound from beyond the factory interrupted her.
It was the sound of gunfire. “The first shots of the night.”
And it was swiftly followed by the sound of screaming.
“Find a position!” Obel yelled. “Find a position and hold it!” The Ghosts in
eleven platoon had started moving the moment they heard the first shots, but
they were met by a surge of panicking pilgrims rushing out of the camp area.
Two or three guardsmen were knocked off their feet by the moving crush.
The initial bursts of enemy fire had appeared only as flashes of light in the
distance behind the press of bodies, but now actual laser bolts were visible,
bright and hard, searing over the heads of the crowd. Hot red or hotter white,
the lines of shots walked and bent like tracer rounds through the gloom. A
series of them struck the warehouse wall behind Obel’s location and blew
out thick chunks of plaster and brick. Two loose rounds hit a stylite in the
middle distance and knocked him, flailing, off his pillar. Other shots arced
down mercilessly into the terrified masses.
“Oh feth!” Obel cursed, down in cover behind a handcart with his voxofficer.
The vox-man was shouting to be heard as he relayed the situation in.
“Estimates?” Obel yelled.
“I can’t see a bloody thing, sarge!” Brehenden barked back, trying to push
through the disorder.
Larkin had managed to reach a doorway on the other side of the
thoroughfare. He narrowed his eyes and watched the light show for a few
seconds.
“At least a dozen shooters. Light or standard las,” he called out once he’d
assessed the pattern. “But they’ve got something heavier. A grunt cannon or
even some kind of plasma cooker.”
That was what was doing the real harm. Potent firepower, auto-cycle,
indiscriminate. Dozens of pilgrims were already dead. The heavy had so
much kick, it brought down another of the hapless stylites by chopping clean
through the pillar he was standing on. Larkin observed with astonishment that
the other pillar-dwellers didn’t try to flee or climb down. They simply sank
to their knees on the precarious perches and started to pray.
“Can you knock it out?” Obel yelled.
Larkin studied the play of las-bolts in the air, watching for the fat, dull red
ones. About two hundred metres north and east.
“I can try,” he said, without enthusiasm.
Obel waved Jajjo and Unkin forward to partner Larkin. Jajjo, darkskinned
and handsome, was eleven’s new scout and the first Vervunhiver to
achieve promotion to that elite speciality. Larkin knew Mkoll had high hopes
of Jajjo’s abilities.
“Call it, Larks,” Jajjo said. Ordinarily, the scout would take point, but this
was now the sniper’s play.
“Left, down there,” Larkin said. The trio pushed across the flow of the
screaming crowd and hurried down a short flight of flagstone steps onto an
arched walkway that ran along the back of a factory blockhouse. Several
dozen pilgrims had elected to hide along here, and cowered into the walls as
the three guardsmen ran past.
The walkway reached a corner where it split, continuing on over a stone
footbridge into the side of a fabrication mill or descending to the lower
service street by a wooden staircase. Pilgrims flooded along the street
below. Larkin stood at the top of the steps for a moment and cocked his head.
The gunfire sounds had altered slightly, relative to his location.
“Down,” he said and the three of them thumped down the wooden steps
and began following the street by hugging the wall as civilians ran past the
other way.
They reached a cross street. The flow of pilgrims had ebbed. Bodies
sprawled all around on the rutted roadway. A clock shrine lay overturned at
the junction.
Larkin darted out and got in cover behind the clock shrine Immediately, the
street lit up; light las-fire, hissing like quenched steel, and the heavy,
diaphragm-vibrating belch of the cannon Peppered, the carcass of the clock
shrine shook and pieces of wood and plastic splintered off into the air. Shots
chopped into the street paving too, or thudded dully into the draped and
hunched corpses.
Larkin kept his head down. The fusillade he’d stirred up was so intense
there wasn’t a chance of Jajjo or Unkin making it across to join him. They
were still pinned around the corner.
Several cannon rounds came right through the twisted clock that sheltered
him and missed his head by a short margin. Larkin rolled and pulled his longlas
up to his shoulder. Prone, he had a very limited field of view under the
shrine’s cart base, but it was enough for him to slide his long-las through and
clear the sights.
The street beyond resolved in the cold, green shimmer of his night scope.
He had to tweak the visual gain down because the las-flashes swooping his
way were testing the limits of the radiance contrast.
Better. A hot spot. Very hot. A superheated muzzle, something big. He
looked again, identifying three shadows working a heavy cannon on a tripod
behind a parked motor truck forty metres away. More hot spots, smaller,
cooler. Men with lasrifles. One in a doorway, another behind a row of fuel
drums, another low against a side wall. All of them pumping fire at him.
He reached back and opened his musette bag, pulling a handful of
powerclips out and selecting a standard low volt cell. He did it all by touch,
reading the difference between the upright and diagonal crosses of tape he’d
marked the sides with. He’d have preferred to go with a hot-shot for
maximum power, but there were too many targets. A hot-shot was a one-use
cell and he didn’t have the time to keep changing between hits.
Larkin popped the hot-shot clip out of the long-las and replaced it with a
low volt. He made sure he had a green armed tell-tale showing on the backsight,
and then snuggled in. Feth, but they weren’t letting up. Another minute,
no more, and the clock shrine would start falling apart and he might as well
be naked in the middle of the street with a target painted on his face and a
feather up his arse.
The cannon was the obvious initial target, but the noise it was whooping
out would cover him as he picked off the others first. He set on the shooter in
the doorway, waited for him to blaze away again to pick him out of the
shadows properly, and then fired. The enemy probably didn’t even see his
muzzle flash in the confusion.
The one by the side wall now. That’s it, keep shooting. Show me right
where you are…
The long-las kicked. The figure by the wall flopped over.
The shooter by the drums suddenly realised that his cronies were down.
He started to run back towards the cannon. That was when Larkin put his
third shot through the man’s spine.
The cannon started to crank up and fire right at him instead of hosing the
street. No time for chances. Larkin ejected the low volt and slammed a hotshot
home. Each blast of the cannon had many times more power than the
long-las, even with a hot-shot in the pipe, and it was cycling them out at a
rate of five a second. The clock part of the toppled shrine disintegrated and a
wheel went spinning off the cart, dismembered and shedding spokes.
“Yeah, yeah,” said Larkin and fired.
The hot-shot made a growling howl and the stock banged back against the
permanent bruise on Larkin’s right shoulder. It hurt. It always did. He liked
the pain because he always associated it with a kill-shot.
The gunner’s head vaporised and he pitched forward over the cannon.
Sudden silence. Larkin could see the gunner’s two teammates scrambling to
pull him aside as the Tanith sniper locked another hot-shot in place.
Power-cell pack, one metre left of the tripod stand, feed cable attached…
Shoulder smack.
The cell pack exploded with the force of several grenades and tossed the
whole cannon, tripod and all, into the air, along with all three figures, lifting
balletically in a bright bloom of fire.
The tripod carriage bounced twice, making hard, metal clangs. The bodies
didn’t bounce.
“Clear!” Larkin yelled, reloading and getting up. Jajjo and Unkin swept
out of cover and started running past him, snapping off semi-auto bursts to
wash the street. Larkin ran after them, keeping close to the wall.
“Feth me, Larks!” said Unkin, surveying the sniper’s handiwork as he got
into a covering position at the next corner, near to where the destruction of
the cannon had made a burning crater in the roadway. “You don’t mess
about!”
“Pat him on the back later,” said Jajjo. He was crouching beside the truck
and had begun firing down the left hand street.
More assaulters were moving up towards them. Lots of them. And Jajjo
recognised their blood-red uniforms at once.
Blood Pact. So it was true, Tona Criid thought to herself. Up to a point, at
least. The “heretic dissidents” raiding Beati City were actually trained,
drilled and seasoned infantry from the archenemy’s elite field corps. What
Corbec’s briefing had omitted was the scale. This wasn’t a skirmish raid.
This was a full-on assault.
The enemy was pouring out of the wasteland into the Glassworks sector in
force, heavily serviced by infantry support weapons and portable shields. By
her own estimate, fifty or more pilgrims had been slaughtered in the opening
phase, caught between the ruthless shock-fire of the attackers and the
virtually helpless Imperials. Now the pilgrims had mostly fled into cover
nearby, or en masse up into the inner city, and the battle had opened up, a
ferocious street-fight running up through the obsidae, the camps and into the
manufactories in the zone. Criid’s platoon, supported by Domor’s, held a
three block area, with Obel’s unit not far away to their west. She was
reinforced fifteen minutes into the fight by three more platoons transitting in
from the east, and by the column of local warriors voxed up by Captain
Lamm.
It was ugly, as ugly as anything she’d ever known, and that was saying
something. It felt a little like the street war she’d been caught up in back at
Vervunhive, but there the enemy had been the well-equipped but drone-like
Zoicans. The Blood Pact were a different thing altogether. They knew how to
fight the streets. They were as skilled as the Ghosts and more disciplined
than any Chaos force she’d ever encountered. It also compared unfavorably
with the trench war on Aexe Cardinal that they’d only recently left behind. At
the time, she’d believed that to be the benchmark of bad in terms of combat.
Trapped — like rats and with rats — in narrow, filthy dugouts, sometimes
fighting hand to hand.
But this was a gakking nightmare. The Glassworks was too open, too
meandering. Every corner and twist of walkway, every sub-alley and back
run, was a death trap. In a trench, you at least knew the enemy was in front of
you.
Laughing, she burst off a spray of las-shots and slammed a Blood Pacter
backwards through an archway. Two more appeared, and she felled them
both as well.
“What the feth is funny?” Lubba shouted at her, blasting with his newly
issued lasrifle. It seemed too small for his meaty, tattooed hands. She knew
he dearly missed his flamer. Gak, but how useful would a flamer have been
right then?
“I caught myself longing for trenches,” she said, re-celling her weapon.
“Struck me as laugh-your-brains-out funny.”
“Left! Left!” Subeno was yelling suddenly. A torrent of las-fire whickered
down a side street and Criid and Lubba had to dive to find cover. Domor ran
past her, with Nehn, Bonin and Milo. They closed down the fresh angle of
attack with a heavy sheet of rapid fire Several more Ghosts, led by Chiria
and Ezlan, pushed through the gap and drove the fight back down the street.
One of the Ghosts lurched and dropped. Criid couldn’t see who it was. But
she could see for sure they were dead.
Lamm’s men had the cross street down from them locked up. Every few
seconds, Criid could hear the hiss-burp of his sanctioned flamer. Behind
them, in the next street block, Herodian PDF were engaged in a running battle
with the enemy inside a row of iron-framed tithe barns.
“How’s our back looking?” she called to Lubba. He was covered in
plaster dust and looked like he’d been rolled in flour.
“Like I have the remotest fething idea,” he replied.
She got up and ran back down the narrow street, picking her way between
the bodies of slaughtered pilgrims. DaFelbe, with nine troops in a good
location, had the back end of the street sealed, but was coming under
increasingly heavy fire. She saw Posetine and Vulli dragging Mkhef back out
of the firing line. He’d been shot through the neck and chest. She doubted
he’d see sunrise.
Rounding the corner, she ran right into Captain Daur leading his platoon up
through the smoke.
“Report!” he yelled over the shooting.
Criid made a vague gesture around her. “They’re fething well all over us!”
she began. “Get back!”
“Cover!” he yelled, and his platoon broke towards the doorways and
shattered windows of the barn opposite.
Criid moved the other way into a rubble strewn alley and straight into
three Blood Pact troopers coming the other way.
Criid yelped and dropped. A las-round burned across her scalp.
It knocked the sense out of her. She lay face down in the rubble, unable to
move, to see…
Something came down off the roof behind the Blood Pacters. A single
Ghost, laspistol in one hand, straight silver in the other. In less than two
seconds, all three enemy troopers were dead, two shot point-blank, the other
slit open.
Breathing hard, Lijah Cuu lowered his hands. He was dripping with blood.
He walked over to Criid and crouched down beside her. Figures ran past the
end of the alley. Shots whined.
He holstered his pistol, and twitched the combat knife over so it was
point-down from his bloody fist. Then he rested the tip of it against the nape
of her neck. A drop of dark blood welled up around the razor-sharp point.
With his other hand, he stroked her hair, matted with blood, and then
dragged a dirty finger down the slope of her exposed cheek.
“Sure as sure,” he muttered hoarsely. He raised the blade to slam it down.
A big hand closed around his rising wrist and held it dead. Cuu gasped in
pain and glanced up.
“Don’ you hurt nobody,” Kolea said.
“Get off me!” Cuu said.
“Don’ you hurt nobody, Lijah-Cuu,” Kolea repeated, rising. Cuu was
forced to come up with him, his wrist viced in Kolea’s monumentally strong
grasp.
“I was trying to help her! She needs help! Look at her!” Cuu squealed.
“Her gas-hood is twisted around her throat! Look! Look, gak it! I was gonna
cut it off!”
“You go ’way,” Kolea said. “Go ’way now.”
He released Cuu’s wrist Cuu backed off, staring at Kolea. Kolea returned
the gaze, placid.
“You help her then,” Cuu said, “you stupid gak-head.” He raised the war
knife slightly, then wiped the blood off it on his trouser leg and sheathed it.
“Go ’way!” Kolea said. Cuu vanished into the shadows.
Kolea bent down and rolled Criid over, stripping off her constricting gashood.
Then he gathered her up in his arms and started to walk.
Out on the street, Lubba saw him coming and felt his heart freeze. He’d
been there, on Phantine two years before, and seen this exact thing. Kolea
carrying the injured Criid to safety. Seconds later, Kolea had been hit and the
man they all knew and loved had disappeared.
Lubba leapt up before it could happen again and pulled Kolea into cover.
“Medic!” he shouted. “Medic here now!”
Two streets away, mortar rounds were falling on the sheds and factory
spaces. Seething sheets of flame rushed out of doorways and windows,
spraying glass into the air and shaking the earth. A roof caved in. Two long
assembly shops were ablaze.
Milo cowered in the cover of a half-fallen wall. His ears rang with
overpressure. Blood from a shrapnel wound dribbled down his cheek. Bonin
lay beside him, trying to tug a sliver of glass out of his palm.
“Well, this is fething nice, isn’t it,” he said over the roar of detonations.
“Indeed,” Milo answered. He was rattled and dazed by the explosions but,
beyond that, he had the oddest feeling. Like…
Like on Hagia.
He never had found out what signals had wanted him for.
“Wise up!” Bonin suddenly hissed, and rolled over, bringing his lasrifle
up. He cracked off a couple of rounds and Milo joined his efforts. Red-dad
figures had just emerged from the bombed-out buildings ahead of them.
They fired with care and precision. Bonin, a hugely able scout, had been
trained in warfare by Mkoll, and knew how to shoot and how to wait to
shoot. Milo had learned his battle-craft from a variety of sources… Colonel
Corbec, Gaunt himself and, most especially, Hlaine Larkin. Milo picked his
targets with a huntsman’s expertise.
Between them, they shot down nine Blood Pact attackers as they emerged
from the ruins and tried to push down the street.
They huddled in the rubble for a few minutes, and when the mortars started
up again, they slid back in the direction of the main force.
“Help me!” someone was shouting. Flames were licking up around the
buildings nearby and spitting sparks up at the fluttering shield.
Milo broke into a run, Bonin alongside him. They saw a man up ahead, a
well-built man in late middle age wearing the robes of an infardi pilgrim. He
was trying to drag an elderly man out of a burning manufactory.
“There are more inside!” Alphant yelled at the two Ghosts as they reached
him. “By the Saint, the place is on fire!”
The abandoned barn Criid had opened for Alphant’s faithful just a short
while before was now riven with flames. Many of those inside were too old
or infirm to save themselves. Or they were children, helplessly lost and
terrified.
Milo and Bonin went back in with Alphant and shooed the screaming
children out. Rafters came down in scuds of flame. Bonin and Alphant
grabbed an old woman in a litter seat and struggled out with her, patting out
the flames which had caught on her dress.
Milo grabbed up two small children and scrambled them through into the
night air.
Outside, they were met by a rain of las-fire and hard rounds. The Blood
Pact had caught up with them. The old woman Bonin and Alphant had carried
to safety died in her chair. Milo couldn’t bear to look at the other casualties.
He and Bonin dragged their las rifles off their shoulders and began
returning fire, using the masonry of a disintegrated store front as a barricade.
“Give me something! Anything!” Alphant yelled from cover in a doorway,
children huddled around him.
“You know what to do with it?” Milo shouted back.
“I was Guard! I know!”
Milo fetched out his laspistol and threw it to Alphant. Then he chucked
over some spare dips from his musette bag. The three of them began to fire
down the street.
Ducking in and out and shooting, Alphant suddenly saw the girl, Sabbatine.
He’d been looking for her all night… ever since their encounter in the
Ironhall camp, in fact. There was something about the girl, something
remarkable, something that had driven him to seek her out.
She came out of a lathe shop down the street, rushing a group of child
pilgrims from a block where flames were leaping up. They ran in line,
holding hands. She looked like a scholam teacher on an outing.
“Get back! Get back!” Alphant shouted out to her.
She turned, saw him, and began hurrying the children towards the cover
position where Alphant and the two Ghosts lay.
“For feth’s sake!” Milo exclaimed, seeing them come. Las-fire whipped
around the heads of the little, urgent procession. How was it missing? How
were they not dead?
Bonin and Milo rose up a little, and fired to give them cover, then began
dragging the wailing children down behind the barricade as they reached
them.
“Come on!” Alphant yelled at the girl. She seemed to be making no effort
to duck or keep low. He risked his own skin and ran out of cover to grab her
and the last of the children. A shot grazed his thigh. Somehow, the tiny girl
kept him upright until they tumbled back into shelter.
“I was looking for you,” he said.
Sabbatine smiled. “I know.”
Milo crawled over to them, urging the sobbing children to stay low, trying
to make it sound like a game.
“That was a very brave thing you did,” he said to the girl. She looked over
at him and Milo was lost for words. He’d never seen her before in his life,
but he knew her. As if he’d always known her.
Milo shook himself to clear the distraction from his mind. “We have to get
these children out of here,” he said. “Bonin?”
“No go!” Bonin yelled from nearby, in amongst the cowering kids and
other pilgrims himself. The fire’s choked off the back end of the street. “We
can’t get through that way.”
Milo slithered forward and dared a look out down the street ahead. Sparkfilled
coils of smoke washed across the trashed, shot-up accessway. He saw
men moving up through it men with rifles and chilling iron masks. Every few
seconds, one or more raised his weapon and fired in their direction. Far too
many for just the three of them to repel.
Then even that became academic. The advancing Blood Pact infantry were
drawing aside into the edges of the ruined street. Something was approaching
from behind them.
“Oh feth…” groaned Milo as the assault tank, painted crimson and defiled
with abhorrent symbols, rolled into view.
“This is not an appropriate time for an audience,” said the Civitas Beati staff
officer. “The city is under attack.”
“Really? Make a list of more appropriate occasions then, feth you!” Zweil
snarled. The soldier, in his heavy battle-dress and polished armour segments,
towered over the aged ayatani, and in the candlelight of the atrium it was
impossible to read the expression on his hard-set face. Behind him, the
massive bronze doors of the city’s chief Ecclesiarchy cathedral, situated near
the summit of hive tower one, were engraved with images of Kiodrus holding
up the bowl for the Saint to cleanse her wounds. The doors were shut
resolutely.
“Father, please,” the staff officer began.
“I’ve come a long way to see her,” Zweil told him.
“So have very many people.”
Zweil waggled his bony hands in frustration. “Do you know who I am?”
“You are Imhava Ayatani Zweil, and only an old rogue like you would see
fit to make a ruckus like this.”
The voice came from behind him. Zweil glanced round and found himself
facing another old man in priestly robes.
“Kilosh,” he said, bowing. Kilosh returned the gesture. “You’re a long
way from home for a tempelum ayatani, brother,” said Zweil.
“The circumstances of our devotion change, brother.” Kilosh smiled. “It’s
surprisingly good to see you again, you cantankerous old troublemaker.”
“And you, though you seem as starchy and straight-laced as ever. I need to
see her, brother.”
“That much is evident to everyone in shouting distance. I might see what I
can arrange, except…”
“Except what?” Zweil scowled.
“There is enough trouble for us all tonight. I’ll not have you causing
more.”
Zweil drew Kilosh to one side and lowered his voice. “I know what you
think. Not only do I have a less than pristine reputation, I’ve been consorting
with these Tanith heathens for longer than might have done me good.”
“Brother, I do not regard Gaunt and his men as heathens.”
Zweil paused. “Neither do I, as it goes. But you’re afraid I’ll go in there
and denounce her to her face. Disbelieve as Gaunt disbelieves.”
“His lack of faith indeed pains me, brother.”
“Not half so much as it does me. He is a good man, and honest, and I’ve
hitched myself to his regiment this last while because he seemed a true
devotee of the Saint. I do not know what has occurred to break his faith, but it
saddens me.”
Kilosh nodded. “So you haven’t come as his emissary, to unmask the false
idol?”
“Rather the reverse. Brother, I need to seek audience so I can go back and
affirm the truth to him. Make him see. Make him believe.”
“You entertain no doubts of your own?”
Zweil shook his head. “There have been signs, portents, omens, enough to
mass an exodus of pilgrims, enough to turn this part of the Imperium on its
head. The divination of a dozen temples of a dozen worlds has foretold,
emphatically, that the Saint is reborn and come here to Herodor. The
evidence is unequivocal. I believe she is here. I believe full stop. I will do
everything in my power to make Gaunt believe too. For without his faith, we
are doomed.”
Kilosh studied Zweil’s face for a long moment, then beckoned him to
follow.
The Civitas Beati regimentals drew back the bronze doors, and the two
old priests hobbled into the vast chancel of the great church. The marble
walls and pillars were laced with gilt, and obsidian mosaics had been
chased into the stone facings. Clock shrines had been clustered inside the
entrance, along with glacial heaps of islumbine garlands. A massive,
sculptural eagle wrought from black iron, thirty metres from wingtip to
wingtip, was suspended from the domed roof. The deep rows of pews,
arranged in a semi-circle fan, were made of a dark, varnished wood and, at
the high altar, great candlesticks worked from gleaming chelon shell fluttered
with yellow flame. The altar itself was a large, rectangular basin of stone,
filled with holy water from the balneary. The water was smooth and
unrippled, like a brown mirror.
Zweil knelt and made devotion for a moment facing the altar. Then Kilosh
helped him back to his feet and led him through to the inner chapel. Esholi
handmaids, robed in violet albs and white bicom headdresses, waited
outside the gilded screen of the iconostasis. Kilosh opened the old screen
door and the pair descended the few, worn steps into the tiny crypt.
It was dark, save for phospha lamps and a shaft of faint exterior light
swirling with the glow of the city shield, that fell through a narrow slit high
up the wall above the simple shrine altar. A woman was kneeling there, in
prayer, the window light dipping onto her.
She heard them and rose, turning. She wore long, blue robes and a white
stole, and her glossy black hair was tied up away from her face. Kilosh
bowed at once Zweil stared at her, unable to express himself. He felt his
heart pound as if it was about to rupture, as if he had come this far and this
long only for his ancient body to fail him now.
“Ayatani Zweil,” said the Saint, her voice like silk. Islumbine. He could
smell islumbine strongly on the air.
He gasped and fell to his knees. Words would not come.
“Shhhh, loyal father,” she said, and reached out a hand. He took it between
his own.
Something thrilled through his skin, like an electric charge. Like needles.
He broke the grip sharply and looked up at her, confused.
“Sanian…”he said.
Her smile had not faded. “You know the vessel I am in, Ayatani Zweil.
You recognise it but—”
“No!” he said, struggling to his feet. He was blinking hard, as if trying not
to cry. “Oh, God-Emperor, he was right. You’re Sanian…”
She backed from him. Kilosh rose, grunting with effort. “Damn you,
Zweil!” he hissed. “You said you would not do this! You tricked me!”
“No, no…” Zweil said, still staring at her. “With all my heart, Kilosh, I
meant what I said back there. But now I see the truth. It is not the truth I
wanted to see, but it is the truth nevertheless.”
Kilosh angrily pulled at Zweil’s sleeve to drag him back. The imhava
ayatani pushed him away. “The Saint is here I feel her in every stone and
every breath of air. But this is not her!”
The tank fired again, burying a shell in the facade of the burning manufactory
behind them. Rock and glass was hurled into the air. The children and the
pilgrims were screaming.
“Tube-charge!” Bonin yelled.
“You’ll never get close enough!” Milo bawled back, shielding his head
from the fluttering debris. He scrambled over to Bonin and pushed the tubecharges
from his satchel into Bonin’s hands. “Not unless it’s distracted! On
three!”
Another shell howled over their heads. The tank was just twenty metres off
now. Its hardpoint stubber started chattering, raking the rubble barricade.
The two Ghosts started to run in opposite directions, heads down. Bonin
hurtled down the left side of the roadway, tight to the wall, trying to strap the
tube-charges together as he ran. Milo crossed to the right side, went on hands
and knees until he reached a doorway, and then flopped round. Through the
smoke, he could see Alphant and the other adult pilgrims trying to squeeze
the children into what little cover remained.
“Ready?” Bonin’s voice crackled over the micro-bead.
“Go!” Milo said. He swung up out of hiding and let rip with his lasrifle on
full auto. The shots pinged and flashed against the bruised metal hull of the
war machine. It lurched to a stop and then the stubber came round to aim at
him. He barely got down in time. The hefty, solid-slug weapon blew the wall
and doorway over his curled up body into fragments. It wasn’t enough. He
hadn’t distracted it for anything like long enough for Bonin to get close.
Milo started to crawl again as more flurries of shrieking stub rounds went
over him. If only he could—
He heard Alphant shouting and looked up.
The girl was running from cover. Running into the middle of the warwounded
street, right out in front of the tank.
“Feth, no!” Milo yelled, and started to dash after her.
She was right in front of the tank, both hands raised like an arbites officer
controlling road traffic. The tank stopped as if puzzled. The main turret
turned, lowering the massive cannon, like a cyclops eye-stalk, to stare at her.
Bonin came out of the smoke alongside the tank and hurled the tubecharges.
They bounced along the hind-part of the hull, and came to rest under
the lip of the turret’s aft cowling.
Milo dived headlong and brought the girl down hard, smashing her aside
just as the main tank weapon fired.
And the tube-charges detonated.
At that moment, on a sliproad leading down between manufactory sites into
the Ironhall sector, Captain Daur fell down so hard and so suddenly the
troopers around him thought he’d been hit.
“Captain!” Brennan yelled, running to him. A few sparkling las-shots from
the raiders down the slope drifted past like fireflies. Trooper Solia was
yelling for a medic.
“I’m all right,” Daur said. His teeth were chattering, like he was cold. “I
mean, I’m not hit.”
“Why did you fall down, captain?” Solia asked, fierce concern on her
dust-smudged face.
“I just had… the most awful feeling,” Daur said, and then laughed at how
stupid it sounded.
There was nothing stupid about the expression on his face.
In the back of the transport, in the rancid, recycled air, Curth stepped back
from the Herodian trooper she’d been trying to sew back together and shook
her head with a sigh. Many more injured, most of them infardi, were gathered
around the entry ramp of the heavy vehicle. Every now and then, it vibrated
as the ground shook from nearby shell-falls.
Curth heard a clatter and looked round. Chief Medic Dorden, working at a
gurney beside her, had just knocked an entire tray of surgical instruments
over.
“Dorden?”
He swayed. His face, behind his plastic mask, was grey and unhealthy.
“Dorden!” Curth cried, hurrying to him.
“Ana? What just happened?”
“What do you mean?”
“Didn’t you see that flash? It was so bright…”
“No… nothing more than the barrage we’re already getting.”
“So bright…” he whispered.
The Tanith reinforcements leapt out of their transports the moment the column
of trucks pulled up. They’d reached a crossroads on Principal I, facing north
on the Guild Slope, where the southern boundary of the Ironhall and
Glassworks sectors began. One by one, light tanks and self-propelled guns of
the Regiment Civitas Beati powered past, moving up to the front line, along
with Salamanders and light cannon-platforms from Lugo’s landing force.
Gaunt checked his bolt-pistol clip and walked the length of one of the
stationary troop carriers to where Corbec was briefing squad leaders.
“I know these babies have nice, thick armour,” Corbec was saying,
slapping the hull of the carrier, but they’re also big fat targets. “We’ve got
close-engage street fights up ahead, and you’ll be more use — and safer —
on foot. Get ready to disperse by squad.”
He glanced round at Gaunt. “Anything you want to add, sir?”
Gaunt was about to answer when Corbec suddenly put a hand to his head
and swayed.
“Colonel?”
“Oh my God-Emperor…” said Corbec, looking up into Gaunt’s eyes. “Did
you not just feel that? Did you not just feel that?”
“Ayatani Zweil! Ayatani Zweil, withdraw yourself now!” Kilosh was
shouting.
“Don’t you understand, Kilosh? Can’t you unbend enough to see it?” Zweil
pointed across the chapel at the Saint, who watched him with reproachful
silence.
“I will summon the temple guards and have you ejected if you do not cease
and depart now!” Kilosh stormed.
Zweil, his head pulsing, was about to reply when he felt a smoky, rusty
tang in his mouth.
He looked at Kilosh and coughed. Blood spattered into his raised hand.
“Zweil? What’s the matter with you?”
Oh my dear lord Emperor, Zweil thought This is it. I’m having a stroke and
—
And that was all he thought. Soundlessly, he pitched forward and cracked
his head on the flagstones.
“Zweil?” Kilosh said, more mystified than anything else. He stooped
beside his elderly colleague, felt for a pulse and started to call for help.
There was a shriek from behind him.
He turned to see that the Saint had fallen to her knees. In the light of the
phospha lamps, he saw a frightened, horrified look on her face. Her shaking
hands were dabbing at the blood streaming from her nose.
“Help me!” Kilosh screamed. “Help me here!”
There was nothing left of the tank apart from a heap of blackened metal
shreds. Dense blue smoke filled the narrow street, making it hard to breathe,
Bonin was coughing and choking as he ran back. His ears were still ringing.
“Milo! Milo!”
The boy was face down in a ditch, covered in ash and pebbles. Bonin
reached him about the same time as Alphant did. Milo came to as they rolled
him over. He was miraculously alive and intact.
But the girl, nearby, curled up by a broken kerb, was not. The blast of the
tank round, which had dug the ground up beneath both of them and hurled
them into the air, had landed her hard. Her neck was broken and she was
dead.
Alphant cried out in despair.
Milo hadn’t seen any of this, but at the sound of the cry, his guts tightened.
He got up and knew, long before he actually saw her body, that something
awful had just happened. Something huge, something dark, something more
than all the waste and death and slaughter around them.
Something unholy.
FOUR
MAGNIFICAT
“I know what I saw then. And I know what I see now.”
—Zweil, ayatani
From the streets of the Guild Slope in mid-city, a nimbus of russet-pink and
yellow could be seen suffusing the darkness over the north-west skirts of the
metropolitan area. Individual sparks of light flickered in that blanket glow
like grounded lightning. Dull booms and roars, pent in by the acoustic lid
formed by the city shield, rolled back to their ears, and smoke, similarly
trapped by the shield, collected into a wispy roof like low cloud. According
to the now frenetic reports of Civitas tac logis, over a thousand hostiles, with
supporting armour, were assaulting the city.
And the city was falling. Partly under the fury of the attack, and partly
beneath the weight of an inexplicable sense of defeat and loss that had settled
over the population during the hours of the night.
Viktor Hark could not account for it, but he could feel it. An ache, a feeling
of disillusion, a sapping misery. Perhaps it was the unexpected speed and
ferocity of the chaos onslaught. Perhaps it was a general realisation of how
fragile the Imperial position really was.
Even in his worst-case contemplations of disaster, Gaunt had never
expected things to go so badly wrong so rapidly. Hark knew that as a
certainty. He’d spent considerable time with Gaunt, risk-assessing the woeful
defensive opportunities afforded by the Civitas Beati, the far from adequate
numerical strengths at their disposal, the complete lack of preparation time. It
was a bleak picture, and Gaunt had made no secret of his fear that once the
archenemy’s main force arrived, the fight for Herodor would be as good as
done.
But that main force had still to reach Herodor, and yet the city already
seemed close to collapsing in one night.
“Tac logis was still referring to the invaders as heretic dissidents.” Hark
sighed when he heard this and tugged the micro-bead from his ear. He didn’t
want to listen anymore.
The streets were dogged, by people and by lamentation. That was it. This
was not the sound of terror and alarm rising from the crowds. This was the
sound of woe.
Hark was riding in a heavy-fendered troop transporter near the front of a
reinforcement column. There were twelve transporters, all identical grey,
long-bodied Munitorum vehicles, and they were only making any headway
through the crowds at all because of the three Chimera heavies from the lord
general’s life company that were leading them through. The sight of tracked
armour made the distressed crowds part sharply.
Colonel Kaldenbach, Lugo’s field commander, had command of the
column, and the Tanith and Herodian PDF squads in the troop carriers
answered to him. Hark knew Kaldenbach fairly well from his time on the
lord general’s staff, an uncompromising but gifted officer who had crowned a
good career in the Ardelean Colonials with elevation to Lugo’s personal life
company.
The column turned west off Principal II, under the broad aqueducts that
serviced the agriponic district, and rolled into the wide plaza of
Astronomer’s Circle in the shadow of the great volcanic plug on which sat
the Astronomer’s Platform, that bastion of Herodian science and learning. It
was up there, in the ancient observatories that had been operating
permanently for over two thousand years, that Cazalon had devised and
written his treatise on non-baryonic matter and Hazmun Zeng, three centuries
later, had doggedly completed his Theory of Gravitation in the face of fierce
Inquisitorial displeasure. Hark had been told that it was possible to visit
Zeng’s workshop study, which had been preserved, by order of the first
officiary, exactly as the great man had left it. The idea appealed to Hark
immensely. To climb the steps rough-hewn in the side of the rock plug up into
that quiet little island of observatories, macroscope towers, sidereal
calculators and libraries high above the murmur of the city and spend a few
quiet moments in the dusty room where Zeng had made such a staggering
contribution to Imperial science, filling notebooks with mirror-script to fool
the watching eyes of the Inquisition.
But war, as ever, anchored Hark to the ground. In twenty years, he had
travelled to and served on over forty worlds, many of them rich with cultural
treasures and sites of significance. He had never enjoyed the indulgence of
visiting any of them. There was always fighting to be done, or battle orders
to review and, when that was over, a troop-ship waiting to convey him to the
next theatre.
The column drew up in the Circle and the units disembarked. Kaldenbach,
sturdy in his long green coat and cap, marched the line of assembly, issuing
orders. There were fifty troopers from Lugo’s life company in the support
force, all of them dad in heavy green fatigues and camo-helms. A major
called Pento from the Regiment Civitas Beati was in charge of the Herodian
portion, two platoons of Civitas Beati elite and five of regular Herodian
PDF. Sergeant Varl drew up the Ghost element of five platoons: his own,
Haller’s, Arcuda’s, Raglon’s and Ewler’s.
Putting his commissar’s cap on brim first—“Gaunt-style,” the Ghosts
called it — Hark felt somewhat surplus to requirements. Kaldenbach even
had his own commissars, an inseparable pair of identical twins called
Keetle. They were thin, bony redheads with fair skin and thyroid eyes,
dressed in black, patent leather stormcoats that creaked as they strode along,
singing out incendiary and fortifying mottoes in stereo. Bad form, in Hark’s
book. The assembling soldiers were clearly spooked. They were on the
doorstep of a savage urban fight zone and about to go in head first, and
around them lay a city that seemed to have already given up.
“Soldiers of the Imperium!” yelled Keetle One.
“You see that up there?” bawled his brother, pointing up at the
Astronomer’s Platform.
“The seat of Herodian learning! From there, astronomers maintain a
permanent study of the enfolding majesty of the heavens, comprehending their
secrets and discerning their truths!”
“But even their vigilance,” yelled Keetle Two, “is but a brief glance
compared to the eternal vigilance of the holy God-Emperor!”
“Praise be the God-Emperor!”
“Praise be the God-Emperor, who watches over us all, at all times, and in
all things!”
“His eyes are on you all now,” declared Keetle One. “They do not stray,
they judge and consider your every action!”
“So do not disappoint him! Do not fail in this great hour of warfare!”
They rattled on for a good while like this. Hark could kindle a rousing
speech like the best of them when necessary, but this seemed like overkill.
Just as Gaunt sometimes allowed himself to play genial soft fiddle to Hark’s
brimstone, so now Hark felt it was his time to be more sympathetic.
He started with Sergeants Arcuda and Raglon. Both were newly lifted to
squad command. They were still finding their feet, and on Aexe Cardinal,
Raglon’s first taste of combat leadership had been cursed by massive bad
luck and heavy losses.
They tensed as he walked up, so he smiled, and that seemed so unusual to
them they both sniggered.
“Ready to go?”
“Sir,” they both affirmed. He looked at their platoons, drawn up in triple
lines, sparing a particular moment to study Trooper Costin in Raglon’s outfit.
It had been Costin’s drunken errors that had proved so expensive to Raglon’s
unit on Aexe. Gaunt should have shot him by rights, and would have done
too, but for the passionate intervention of Dorden. Dorden had put his neck
on the line to spare Costin, and had undermined Gaunt’s authority in the
process. The once-warm friendship between the colonel-commissar and his
chief medic had been seriously strained ever since. Hark had his eye on
Costin, but the man seemed to have cleaned up his act in a real effort to
redeem himself.
“Let me tell you something,” Hark said quietly to Raglon and Arcuda. “I
know what’s in your heads right now. Fear. Fear of pain and death, fear of
failure. The weight of your new responsibilities. That sick feeling you’ll feth
up and let the side down. And those two are not helping your nerves with
their pompous yakking.”
He thumbed sidelong at the Keetles, who were now leading the reluctant
Herodians in a declaration of the Imperial creed. Raglon and Arcuda both
laughed nervously.
“Forget about them,” Hark said. “Think about this. The men out there, our
friends and comrades, our fellow Ghosts, down there in the battle zone, up to
their necks in the worst kind of feth. Think about them and think about this…
it’s you they most want to see. Not just reinforcements. Ghosts. The fething
best field troops it’s ever been my honour to know. There is nothing they are
hoping for more than the sight of these five platoons storming in, guns blazing
and hearts afire, to ease their heavy burden. To them, you’ll be a dream come
true. Think about what it’ll mean to them, and I promise you, all your worries
will seem insignificant by comparison.”
They both nodded, firm and resolved. Hark clapped them both on the
shoulders. “You’ll be fine, sergeants. Spread the word amongst your men, get
them set.”
Hark walked on to Haller, a Verghast vet, and Ewler, a grizzled old Tanith
career soldier. They needed no soft soap, and his chat with them was a more
workmanlike discussion of tactics and deployment. He answered their
queries, complimented them on their squad turn-out, and told them a joke
about an Ecclesiarchy convent and a curiously shaped fruit that made them
laugh so loud it drew disapproving stares from the Keetles.
Finally, he strolled towards Varl. To the Ghosts, Varl was the soldier’s
soldier, smart-mouthed, cock-sure, roguish but utterly cool under fire. He’d
slogged up through the ranks from common dog-grunt to get squad command,
earning it on sheer merit, and was loved by all. He’d lost a shoulder on
Fortis Binary, and had a hefty augmetic inbuild to replace it. If there was a
hot centre to any fight, Varl would most likely be in it. If there was a scam or
practical joke in the barracks, Varl would be in the thick of that too. The joke
about the nuns and the fruit was one of his. Hark had overheard it just thirty
minutes earlier, during Varl’s platoon warm-up.
“Ready?” Hark asked.
“I was born ready, sir,” Varl replied, then paused. “That’s a lie. I was born
horny. I got ready during my early teens.”
Hark laughed, but he could tell from Varl’s manner something was
bothering him. “What’s up, Ceg?”
Varl looked uncomfortable. He tapped a finger to the micro-bead plug in
his left ear. “I’ve been tuned to the local channel, the tac logis, monitoring the
chatter,” he said quietly. “It sounds like shit in a nalnut is going on down
there. And the mood on the street tonight is like we’ve already lost.”
“Yes, I feel it. I won’t lie, I think this is going to be bad.”
“It’s not just that, sir,” said Varl. “Report came in, five minutes back. Said
the Tanith second officer was down.”
“Down?”
“Dead or hit real bad, they weren’t sure. And then no confirmation.”
“Do they mean Corbec or Rawne?”
Varl shrugged. “Could be either, both are in there. Then again, before the
first wave of reinforcement went in, Captain Daur was the second officer on
the ground.”
Corbec, Rawne or Daur dead. Any of those things would be a critical
blow to the Tanith morale.
“You’ve not said anything to the men?” Hark asked.
“I’m not stupid,” Varl replied acidly, and Hark knew he’d deserved the
rebuke.
“Of course not.”
“I just wish we could move Get on in there and find out,” Varl said. He
looked over at Kaldenbach who, with the ubiquitous Keetles, was now
addressing the lord general’s life company troopers. “I mean, we’re here. All
this fannying around, what are we waiting for?”
“We’re waiting,” said Hark, “for Lugo to vox us the word to advance.” He
thought for a moment. “Come with me,” he said.
They walked over to the colonel’s side. “What is it, Hark?” Kaldenbach
asked.
“Shall we advance, colonel? We are deposed and ready, and the night isn’t
getting any younger.”
“We await word to go,” said Kaldenbach, a pale, handsome man in his
fifties with clean-cut features and wiry grey hair. Given that, from the sounds
of it, tac logis was having difficulty differentiating its arse from its elbow,
that word could be a long time coming in Hark’s opinion.
“Well, sir,” said Hark gently, “my troopers are famous for their scout
specialisation. We should be going in already, preparing the way for your
force.”
Kaldenbach frowned. “I wasn’t aware they were your troopers, Hark. Last
time I checked, you were commissar, not… a ranking colonel as well.” This,
an unwelcome reference to Gaunt’s unusual and unpopular dual status, was a
thinly veiled dig.
“My troopers are famous for their scout specialisation, sir,” said Varl
quickly, beautifully timing his interjection, “and last time I checked, I was
ranking Tanith officer. I’m sure Commissar Hark will agree.”
Hark smiled and nodded.
Kaldenbach looked coldly at Varl, and the Keetles whispered darkly to
each other.
“Anxious to die, sergeant?” Kaldenbach asked.
“Anxious to serve the God-Emperor… and you, sir.”
“Very well,” Kaldenbach snapped. “Move in. We will stand to until word
is given. Pave the way for us, if you’re so damn good at it. And stay in
constant vox-contact.”
Varl saluted and hurried away with Hark beside him. “Ghosts of Tanith!”
he shouted. “Let’s get wriggling! Game’s on!”
The Ghost units massed forward to join him.
“Nicely done, Ceg,” Hark whispered.
“You set him up, sir. I was just there to finish him off.”
The Ghost force surged forward across the paved Circle, dressing their
camo-cloaks, and melted into the narrow streets beyond.
Pento, the Herodian officer, watched them disappear. The last thing he or
any of his men wanted to do was rush prematurely into combat.
Not, it seemed, like the off-worlders in black.
The scrivener’s office ruptured and collapsed, all eight storeys of it. Dust
and fire flushed out from the avalanche of masonry, and the men of five
platoon ran for cover.
Squat, robust, one-eyed and nothing like as mobile as his younger troopers,
Agun Soric threw himself flat and the dust flow rushed over him like a
breaker. The air was full of smouldering paper scraps, millions of pages of
notation physically liberated by the explosion.
“Chief! Chief!” Vivvo’s voice rang through the billowing smoke Soric
pulled himself up.
“Hold your gakking water, Vivvo. I’m not so much as half dead yet.” Even
so, Soric didn’t object as Vivvo steadied him.
“We have got to find that gakking tank,” Soric said.
“Round up! Round up!” Vivvo yelled, and the scattered elements of five
platoon came out of cover. The street was a mess. White rubble covered the
cobbles and most of the buildings on the west side of the road were ablaze.
Soric hobbled forward, sending hand signals to fan his beleaguered troopers
out. Then he sat his wide rump down on a slab of alabaster, took off his mask
and spat.
Kazel, Mallor and Venar suddenly switched round, rifles aimed, as they
picked up movement south of them.
“Twenty, seventeen! Hold your fire!”
“Safeties, boys!” Soric urged, as Sergeant Meryn’s platoon ran up to join
them out of the drifting smoke.
Meryn was a young, slickly handsome Tanith with more front than the
entire fething crusade. It was said Rawne was grooming him, and that, Soric
believed, explained why the previously amiable Meryn had become such a
hardboiled bastard of late. He was openly ambitious in all the wrong ways,
and there were dirty rumours that during the insurgency mission on Phantine,
he’d exposed a cruel, almost psychotic side to his character. It was said he’d
murdered civilians. Soric didn’t know about that, and didn’t want to, and
there was no arguing with the pretty boy’s combat record. But of all the
squads he could have meshed with, Meryn’s was about last on the list, save
Rawne’s platoon, of course.
And then there was the matter of that ridiculously sinister moustache
Meryn had been cultivating.
“Taking a breather, chief?” Meryn suggested as he approached the seated
Soric.
Soric didn’t rise to the bait. “Just waiting for you to win the gakking war
single-handed, lad,” he said, replacing his rebreather. “There’s a tank
somewhere in the streets yonder. It’s making a gakking mess.”
Meryn turned and yelled: “Guheen?”
Trooper Guheen hurried up, a compact missile tube slung over one
shoulder. Coreas came with him lugging the satchel of long-snouted rockets.
“Treads to feth,” Meryn told him. He turned to Soric. “So where’s this
tank?”
Soric rose to his feet. He was a head shorter than Meryn and as ugly as
Meryn was handsome. “If I knew that,” he said, “I’d have fethed the bastard
myself.”
“Sure you would,” said Meryn, dubiously. He waved his platoon forward
into the maze of side alleys behind the ruin of the scrivener’s. “Keep low!”
he shouted. “Find this armour for me!”
Meryn’s platoon, fourteen, was tight and well-drilled, Soric had to give
the pretty bastard that much.
He was about to yell at Vivvo to drag five platoon to order and show
Meryn’s lot how it should be done when a scrap of paper landed at his feet. It
was just one from the blizzard that had been blown up and out of the office
collapse. Drifts of them, many burning, were settling over the ruins. But
where all the others were white, Munitorum grade sheets, this was blue and
lightweight.
He looked down at it, sighed deeply, then scooped it up.
On it, written in his own handwriting, were the words: Guheen’s going to
get himself pulped if he goes that way. The tank is behind the cabinet maker’s
shop.
Just like that. Bold as gak.
Soric shivered, tossed the scrap aside and yelled at the top of his voice:
“Guheen! Hit the bricks!”
Guheen and Coreas both heard him, halted and looked back.
“Get down, you gakkers!” Soric bellowed, running forward. He slammed
into Hefron from his own squad, and wrenched the tread fether out of his
bemused hands.
“What the feth is—” Meryn yelled.
Guheen and Coreas dropped flat about a half-second before a tank shell
slammed through the side wall of the laundry they were passing. The wall
blew out and showered bricks in all directions. The shell, shrieking and
leaving an eddying vapour-trail in the still settling white dust went over their
heads and hit the corner of a shuttered cafe. The blast deafened them all and
collapsed the cafe frontage in a welter of flame and flying stone chips.
Everyone was down, dazed and bewildered.
Except Soric. Panting, he ran through the rubble until he had a clear view
down the side of what had to be the cabinet maker’s shop. There was the
tank, a hefty mid-sized model painted crimson and daubed with markings that
flopped Soric’s stomach. A flayed human hide was stapled across the front of
its hull. Its fat turret was traversing. Soric could hear the dank of the chain
drive.
With his trick leg there would be no kneeling down to soften the recoil…
or hide. He stood his ground as the heavy-gauge barrel tracked round
towards him and sat the missile tube he had wrenched from Hefron’s grip
onto his broad shoulder.
“Hello, gakkers,” he hissed and squeezed the trigger-spoon. The rocket
banged away, kicking smoke out of the tube’s back end with such fury it
threw Soric over. The missile flamed across the rubble and hit the tank just
under the edge of the waist plating. There was a loud explosion, and pieces
of shrapnel zinged through the air, hot and hard as las-rounds.
When Soric looked up, the tank was gutted with fire.
He got to his feet and turned to his men, arms raised and brandishing the
launcher. “Who’s the chief? Who’s the gakking chief?”
They cheered him vigorously.
Meryn crossed to him, pausing to check on Guheen and Coreas, who were
temporarily deaf but otherwise unhurt.
“How the feth did you know?” he asked Soric.
“Lucky guess,” Soric replied.
The vox clicked, and another Ghost platoon closed in on them out of the
dust. It was two platoon, Corbec’s mob, or at least what was left of it.
Mkvenner was in charge, with Rerval at his side.
The tall, lean scout had still not properly recovered from the serious
wounding he had taken on Aexe Cardinal. Mkvenner’s long face was gripped
by swallowed pain.
“Ven!” cried Soric. “Where are the rest of your boys?”
Mkvenner shrugged. “We came under fire Tank fire Three or four units.
Got out all I could. I think—”
“What?”
“I think Corbec might have bought it. We can’t find him anywhere.”
Soric looked away, blinking hard. “Gak, that’s… that’s not good.” He
looked at Rerval. The young signals officer was trying hard not to cry.
“You tried the channels?” Soric asked.
Rerval nodded.
“Try ’em again,” Soric said.
Two closed up with five and fourteen. Vivvo hurried over to Soric and
handed him a brass shell.
“What’s this?”
“Found it in the rubble, sir,” Vivvo said.
Soric took it. He didn’t even have to check now. It was his message shell,
like a bad penny…
He unscrewed the cap and knocked out the fold of flimsy blue paper
inside.
It read: Colm’s alive, but he’s pinned down by cannon fire. Ven will be
dead in two days unless you get him help. Two stalk-tanks south of you, well
hidden. Be wary… a lot more Blood Pact are about to hit.
Soric breathed out hard. “Corbec’s alive,” he told Mkvenner.
“How the feth do you know that?”
“Call it a hunch. Let’s fan west. Rockets to the front. There are a couple of
stalk-tanks out there, hulls down, if I know anything. But we can do this.”
Mkvenner nodded and wiped blood away from the corner of his mouth
with his cuff. Why in the name of the God-Emperor hadn’t he sat back and let
himself heal? What sort of internal damage was he doing to his body?
“Get to a field hospital, Ven,” Soric said.
“I’m fine.”
Soric faced him, brows furrowed. Tall and lean and deadly, Mkvenner
was about the most frightening man in the Ghosts, and that was before you
knew anything about him. No one ever chose to confront him. Life wasn’t
worth that much hurt. But Soric persisted.
“That’s an order, Mkvenner. Find Dorden or Curth and find them now,”
said Soric.
Mkvenner stared at the thick-set, older man and finally nodded. “Sure,” he
said, and shambled away through the enclosing smoke.
“Move it up! You heard me!” Soric yelled. “Two platoon, you answer to
me now!”
“Jumped up runt,” Meryn said, watching Soric rally the troops around him.
They loved him, the fools.
“Sir?” said Fargher, approaching Meryn. He held out a crumpled ball of
flimsy blue paper.
“What’s this?” Meryn demanded.
“Chief Soric was looking at it before… before he took out the tank, sir. I
thought you’d like to see it.”
Meryn unballed the paper and read it: Guheen’s going to get himself
pulped if he goes that way. The tank is behind the cabinet maker’s shop.
“What is this… warpcraft?” he whispered.
“Sir?” asked Fargher.
“Never mind, Fargher,” Meryn said as he folded the paper carefully and
tucked it into his jacket pocket. “Just thinking out loud…”
For the fourth time in twenty minutes, third platoon attempted to get around
the same street corner without dying. They were bunched up in a little access
terrace behind an oil and gas separation plant in the Ironhall district. The
terrace joined the main street at right angles, and something down that
thoroughfare had them pinned with heavy fire.
With the bulk of his unit huddled low in the terrace way behind him,
Rawne cautiously approached the junction with his platoon scout, Leyr, and
Troopers Caffran and Feygor. If they stayed put much longer, they’d be
swamped by the advancing enemy ground troops, and the terrace was no
place for a firefight.
Most of the Tanith scouts had their own signature trick for looking round
blind corners. Leyr’s was a sweet little pocket periscope, a precision brass
instrument that he’d picked up on Aexe Cardinal. “I got it from an Aexegarian
colonel,” Leyr told anyone who asked, “who stood when he should have
ducked. He had no use for it anymore. Likewise, he had no use for his
spectacles, his moustache comb or his hat.” The periscope was powerful but
small enough to slip into the chart-pocket of his fatigues. He slid the business
end round the fractured brick corner and took a squint. Fifty metres down the
rubble-strewn main street, a stalk-tank sat in the centre of the roadway, its
weapon pods pointing in their direction.
“You were right,” Leyr whispered. “Scuttle-armour.”
Rawne curled his lip in annoyance. “Any AT rockets left?” he asked,
already knowing the likely answer.
“No, sir,” said Caffran. “We’re out. The tread fethers are dry.”
“Suggestions?”
“How far down is it?” Feygor asked Leyr.
“Forty, maybe fifty,” Leyr replied, looking again. “Too far for even the
strongest of them to throw a tube-charge. We better think of something quick,”
he added. “There are troops moving up.”
“I don’t think we’ve got much choice,” Rawne said. “We’ll have to pull
back, maybe reform a position a few streets that way.”
The men nodded. No one liked giving ground, but no one liked dying
needlessly either.
Feygor relayed the orders with a series of quick, clear gestures, and the
platoon began pulling back down the terrace.
The terrace led along to an iron walkway over a chemical drain trench,
and then down into a wide, paved concourse from the centre of which rose
the aluminium tubes and flanges of an atmosphere processor. Units like it, fed
by ducts from the main hive structures, were dotted throughout the outer city,
pumping air to maintain the thin, local atmosphere of the Civitas.
The platoon came to a sudden halt. Rawne hurried up to the front keeping
low. Banda, the platoon’s sniper, had brought them to a standstill. She was
huddled in beside a low wall, long-las raised. Rawne, a spectacularly
unreconstructed Imperial male, had been dead against the admission of
women troopers from the outset, and Banda — oozing self-confidence and
physical appeal — had long been a particular thorn in his side But in the
trench hell of Aexe they had been wounded together, and had helped each
other through, and in the process had reached an understanding Rawne relied
on Banda’s good counsel now as much as he did that of Feygor or Caffran.
Some even rumoured that Rawne and Banda were lovers, but no one dared
ask either of them to confirm it.
“Movement,” she reported.
“Identity?”
“Can’t tell.”
Rawne hand-signalled “ready to engage” back down the file. “Head shot
as soon as you see a head,” he told the girl.
She took aim, and waited until something bobbed into sight in her scope.
At the last moment, she relaxed her finger from the trigger.
“Friendlies,” she said.
A ramshackle squad of Civitas Beati guards was moving warily into the
concourse. Rawne got on the vox and hailed them. Their leader was Udol,
the major he had met during their unorthodox arrival on Herodor just the day
before.
“No going that way,” Udol said, gesturing in the direction he and his men
had approached from. “They’re pasting the area with mortars mounted on
tractor units.” Rawne had already heard the distant, persistent whoop-crump
echoing in their direction.
“It’s as bad behind us,” he said simply. “Blood Pact ground troops
advancing, with at least one stalk-tank. They’ve got the up-street locked.”
“Blood Pact?” Udol asked. “We weren’t told anything about Blood Pact.
Tac logis says its heretic raiders.”
“With respect,” Rawne replied, clearly expressing none at all, “your tac
logis is voxing out of its arse. It’s Blood Pact all right. Trained, tight, wellsupported
and systematic. Their handiwork identifies them. Besides, I’ve met
them before.”
“What do we do?” Udol asked, hoping the tremble in his voice wasn’t too
obvious.
“Do?” sneered Rawne. “I don’t think we’ve a great many options.”
The words were scarcely out of his mouth when their meagre options
fizzled away dramatically. The peeling energy rounds of a stalk-tank’s
cannons splashed across the concourse area, blasting sections of paving up
into the air. Several more punched through the metal duct-work of the
processor and it began emitting an eerie, wounded moan as air escaped from
the holes.
The troops — Tanith and Civitas alike — scattered for cover. Several
troopers fell, cut down.
The options had been reduced to two.
Fight, or die.
A kilometre-long stretch of the wide Principal I, from the tower of the prayer
horn Gorgonaught back through Hazgul Square towards Beati Plaza, was then
the scene of a major armour battle Twenty-nine vehicles of the archenemy’s
main force were driving south, countered by twelve Civitas Beati light tanks,
and six Vanquishers from Lugo’s life company.
The broad, and once majestic, boulevard was littered with burning wrecks
and dimpled with shell-craters. Most of the Chaos armour was stalk-tanks or
light standards, but they had at least one super-heavy, a crimson monster that
annihilated all before it.
Gaunt’s platoon held position in the ground floor of a glassblower’s
fabricatory on the west side of Hazgul Square. They had exhausted their antitank
munitions long since, and could do precious little about the armour. They
concentrated their efforts on the enemy ground troops instead. But it wouldn’t
be long before their continued harassment of the infantry drew the attention of
a Chaos battle tank.
Keeping low to avoid the occasional stray shot that whined in through the
holes in the brickwork, Gaunt moved along his platoon’s position,
distributing encouraging remarks and quiet comments. In a fight-zone like
this, he would have normally gone up a gear or two, maybe resorting to one
of his favourite quotations or an ad hoc speech to rally the mood.
But this mood was flatter than any he’d known. Had he become so
transparent that his men instantly saw in him the looming prospect of failure?
Now he knew the painful truth about the “Saint”, Gaunt could hardly swallow
the rage and disappointment he felt Without that one spark of light and hope,
the fight here on Herodor seemed no better than suicide.
Strangely, it was as if the whole city sensed that too. As if its heart had
been torn out, as if it felt as lost and despairing as he did himself. Gaunt
couldn’t forget the look on Colm Corbec’s face just before they’d deployed
an hour before. “Did you not just feel that? Did you runt just feel that?”
Corbec hadn’t been able to explain it, but Gaunt had seen other troopers in
the vicinity similarly upset for no apparent reason at the very same moment.
And the vox traffic had been abruptly flooded with anguished calls of
dismay. That had been the moment the mood had truly crashed.
Corbec had pulled himself together, and they’d pressed into the zone. The
last time Gaunt had seen his number two, Corbec was shaken and uneasy,
leading his platoon off down a smoke-hazed sidestreet.
Everything shook as two tank rounds hit home nearby. The fabricatory
rocked and dust spattered down from the ceiling. Gaunt checked the box-mag
of his bolt pistol, and clambered across the rubble to where troopers Lyse
and Derin were guarding a doorway. They were both pinking the occasional
shot out of the broken entrance with their lasrifles.
“How are you holding?” Gaunt whispered, crouching behind them.
Lyse raised a dusty hand and indicated some features of the fire-lit
battlefield outside for her commander’s benefit. “They’ve got foot units
moving up behind that wall there, and behind the dead truck,” she said. “We
can’t get a clear shot.”
“But you’d have ’em finished by now with your torch, right?” he asked.
Lyse nodded. On Phantine, she’d become the first female trooper to become
squad flamer, and was proud of that role. A tough, broad-shouldered
Verghastite in her late thirties, Lyse preferred to wear her black vest top to
show off arms that were as well muscled as any male’s. Like all the Tanith
flame-troopers, she missed her speciality weapon, and so did Gaunt. A few
spurts of an Imperial standard man-portable flamer Mk VIII would have
cooked the Blood Pact now edging up to their position in the blindside of the
building.
Beside them, Derin started firing more urgently. A few figures in redbrown
battledress had emerged from behind the burning vehicle wreck
outside and were attempting to rush the side wall. Lyse began shooting too,
and Gaunt scrunched forward on his knees and added his own firepower to
the repulse. Lasrifle shots and bolt rounds rattled out from the doorway. One
of the figures simply fell over and vanished in the rubble Another jerked
back dramatically in mid-stride. The rest ran back for cover.
“Right,” said Gaunt, about to move on. “Keep sharp and do that every time
they try something.”
“It’s like she’s abandoned us, sir,” said Derin suddenly. Gaunt stopped.
For a second, he assumed Derin was talking about Lyse, which made no
sense. Then he looked into Derin’s face and realised that wasn’t what he’d
meant at all.
“The Saint, sir. It feels like we’ve come all this way for her and now she’s
abandoned us.”
Gaunt remembered that Derin had been one of the misfit band Corbec had
led on his private mission back on Hagia. Derin had not shown the same
signs of beatific inspiration at the time as the likes of Corbec and Daur and
Dorden — he’d simply joined Corbec’s endeavour out of loyalty to the old
man — but the experience had clearly affected him.
“She hasn’t,” Gaunt said simply. “She’s here with us. She always is.”
“H-have you met her?” Derin asked.
“Yes, soldier, I have,” Gaunt said, trying not to say anything that was an
outright lie.
“It doesn’t feel like she’s here. Not anymore. It did when we first got here.
It was like there was something in the air. But it’s gone now. Just gone.”
“The Beati Sabbat is right here still, Derin. She will not abandon the
defenders of her shrine. And never forget… the Emperor protects.”
Derin was comforted slightly, but the troubled look didn’t completely
leave his face.
Gaunt was called to the rear of the hab, where his platoon scout Caober
had just slipped back inside from a run down through the shelled street to
their left.
“We’re gonna have to start moving, sir,” he said. “Three or four of the
enemy tanks have turned west, and they’re coming round the back. We’re
gonna get pinned if we stay in here.”
“Where do you suggest?” Gaunt asked.
Caober shrugged. “I linked up with Sergeant Mkoll’s platoon and Captain
Daur’s, sir. They’ve both already been forced back across the intersection
into those habs there.”
“Retreat in other words?”
“Sir, back is the only operative direction. There’s no forward anymore.”
Gaunt nodded. “Any sign of Corbec?”
“No, sir.”
“Let’s peel out odds then evens, through those blast holes in the back.
Caober, find us a hab to take position in and show the Ghosts the way as they
come through. Beltayn?”
His adjutant hurried over.
“Odds and evens, out that way. Caober has point. Spread the word and
let’s make it snappy.”
Beltayn turned to distribute instructions when the hab was struck squarely
by a shell that blew a section of wall in on them and killed two members of
first platoon. A shrieking whoop, a blitzing, gritty fireburst and then everyone
still alive was picking themselves up in the choking smoke.
Gaunt could hear heavy assault fire from outside. Over the micro-bead he
heard Derin.
“They’re coming in! They’re charging us! They’re coming in!”
Gaunt knew there’d be no retreating now. He drew his power sword and
ignited it. “Ghosts of Tanith!” he shouted. “In the name of the God-Emperor
of Mankind… give them hell!”
“What are you doing here, chief?” asked Domor in surprise. Corbec, his
fatigues and pack layered with grey dust had just scrambled into the
manufactory basement where Domor’s platoon was guarding the wounded.
Above ground, the district was ablaze for the most part, and artillery was
pounding it. There was no hope of carrying injured troopers out.
“I got lost,” Corbec said. “In all the confusion. It’s hairier than me out
there. Any of my lads show up here?”
Domor shook his head. “We’ve got people from ten, eleven and thirteen
here, but no sign of anyone from your unit.”
“Vox?”
“You’re joking, in this?” The ground above them shook with the heavy
shelling. Even short-range micro-beads were only barely making it. Corbec
saw Criid lying on a pile of sacking nearby. Kolea and Lubba were with her.
“How is she?”
“Okay,” said Domor. “Head wound. Nothing too bad. Others are worse.”
Corbec could see that for himself. It was ugly and going to get a lot uglier
before daylight. There were civilians down here too. In one corner, Corbec
saw several adults trying to comfort a group of terrified children. Everyone
was black with ash-soot. He wandered over. The adults with the kids were
all civvies, pilgrims by the look of them. Bonin was standing nearby, leaning
his tired body against a wall and sipping from his water bottle.
“Taking a personal interest?” Corbec asked him.
“Me and Milo had to fight like bastards to get those kids out. We were all
penned in a few streets away. It was close.”
“Armour?”
Bonin nodded. “You might want to have a word with Milo,” he said softly.
“Milo? Why?”
Bonin just shrugged and said nothing.
Corbec found Milo in the furthest, darkest corner of the basement space.
He was hunched over, bruised and exhausted. A small shape lay under a dirty
sack beside him.
“Brinny boy?”
Milo looked up. The grief on his face took Corbec’s breath away.
“You look like I feel,” he tried to joke, but Milo was too burdened by
emotion to even respond.
Corbec sat down next to him.
“What happened?”
“There was a girl,” he said. He spoke so quietly, Corbec had to lean
forward to hear him above the bombardment.
“A girl?”
“Yes…” Milo looked at the crumpled form under the sack. Corbec put the
rest together.
“It’s always hard, that. Take your eye, did she? You’ll just have to—”
“You don’t understand, sir. She was… I don’t know. There was something
about her. Something amazing.”
“Well, y—”
“I thought she was the Saint.”
Corbec paused. “What?”
“I knew the Saint was with us. I could feel it Like on Hagia, you know?”
Corbec nodded. He knew the feeling. It had got into his soul on Hagia and
never really left.
“I knew she was with us, really with us. Not just on this planet like we’ve
been told, but right there on the street in the middle of everything.”
“She watches over us,” Corbec murmured.
“She was there. I saw this girl and I just knew.”
“And?”
“She died. She saved the children and then she died. It wasn’t meant to
happen. I can feel it wasn’t. It wasn’t meant to happen like that What will we
do without her?”
Corbec didn’t reply. He lifted the corner of the sacking. The girl was very
peaceful and very dead. Just a young girl, another victim of the endless war.
He laid the sacking back.
“It wasn’t meant to happen,” Milo repeated.
“None of this was,” Corbec growled.
From outside came the rattle of small-arms close by. Domor, Bonin and the
other able-bodied troops in the basement shelter grabbed up their weapons
and headed for the exit.
“Come on,” said Corbec, getting up and checking his rifle’s power cell.
“Come on, Milo. It’s a long way from over yet.”
The first Blood Pact warrior who made it into the shattered hab was a
massive brute, even bigger than the late, lamented Trooper Bragg. He came
through a gap in the east wall that Trooper Loff had, until a moment before,
been defending.
The heretic warrior was clad in heavy fatigue battledress coloured a dark,
patchy russet, with steel-plated boots and iron armour strapped around his
thighs, shoulders and belly. His face, under the red bowl-helmet, was visored
by a black metal mask, an iron grotesque shaped into a snarling, hooknosed,
feral face. His hands, thick with the scar tissue of the heinous Pact ritual,
clutched a laser pistol and a wickedly curved bill-hook.
Loff lay dead on his face in the gap where a blow from the bill-hook had
dropped him. The Blood Pact warrior howled out an obscene war-cry and
ploughed into the hab, firing wildly. There were others behind him.
Gaunt met him head on. His scything, energised blade, the power sword of
Heironymo Sondar, glowed like a sliver of ice as it deflected two of the
storm-warrior’s laser bolts up into the blackened roof. Then he brought it
sidelong and the murderous bill-hook — along with several scarred fingers
— spun into the air in a puff of blood. Borne forward by his own momentum,
Gaunt slammed the blunt nose of his bolt pistol up against the howling
grotesque and fired. The brute, his head demolished, crashed backwards.
Gaunt began firing over his collapsing corpse into the weight of enemy
troopers scrambling through the gap at his heels.
Beltayn and Neith jumped forward beside him, shooting point blank with
their lasrifles and thrusting with the Tanith warknives they had fitted as
bayonets. “Straight silver! Straight silver!” Beltayn was yelling.
It wasn’t the only breach. The hab reverberated with the clash of hand-tohand
combat as Blood Pact storm-squads burst in through window lights,
doorways and shell holes, driving first platoon backwards into the ruins. It
was a killing frenzy, the malevolent, red-hot heart of pure war. The smokefilled
chamber, murky and firelit like daemon hell, was thick with screams,
blows, spraying shots and thrashing figures. They were enveloped in chaos.
Gaunt’s bolt pistol was spent. There were spare mags in his belt-pouches,
but absolutely no chance of reloading in the turmoil. He let it go and
wrenched out his Tanith warknife plunging into the nearest enemy trooper
with both blades. Blood soaked his jacket and his cloak so much the cloth
slapped heavily around him. He realised he was screaming wordless sounds
of rage at the swarming enemy.
They stank. They brought their abattoir reek with them: foul breath, sour
sweat, dried blood and the noxious aroma of the oils and paints with which
they anointed their bodies.
The sword of Sondar split a black-iron visor in two. Blood sizzled off the
charged blade. Gaunt’s warknife hacked into a throat. Something knocked his
cap off. A Blood Pact trooper crashed sideways into him and staggered him,
but the wretch was already dead. Then a laser round clipped the top of
Gaunt’s left shoulder and knocked him to his knees. He put the power sword
through the armoured thighs in front of him, and was flattened as the severed
bodyweight toppled forward onto him.
Beltayn had lost his lasgun. He snatched up a fallen billhook and slammed
it with both hands into the nearest enemy sternum, then leapt forward and
grabbed Gaunt by the shoulders, trying to drag him to his feet. Vanette and
Starck charged in to support him, firing full auto into the scrum of Blood Pact
all around.
“Back! Get back!” Beltayn yelled in Gaunt’s face. The colonel-commissar
didn’t even seem to recognise him. He was dripping with gore. “We have to
get back!” Beltayn repeated, his throat raw from the smoke. Gaunt shoved
him out of the way and butchered another Blood Pacter who was surging at
them. The power sword cut him in two and cracked stone chips out of the
pillar beside him.
An explosion knocked them all off their feet. Masonry rubble rained down
from the roof and the end wall of the hab fell like a stack of child’s playbricks.
Cold air washed in, thick with the smell of fyceline, and contorted the
dense smoke around them into weird eddies and gusting coils.
Sword still clamped in one blood-smeared hand, Gaunt grabbed Beltayn
by the arm and dragged him towards the caved section of wall. Vanette and
Starck followed them, backing their way, emptying the last of their power
cells from the hip as they went. There was no sign of any other member of
first, just dark red figures scrambling through the smoke at their heels.
The four men fell out down the mound of rubble into the open. Las-shots
sizzled out of the hab building after them.
They were in the wide concourse of Hazgul Square itself. The whole area
was on fire. Buildings, reduced to hollow shells by the firestorm, spurting
flames and sparks from their blind windows. Three tanks — one Imperial
light and two enemy models — were burning where they had died. Bodies
littered the ground, half-covered by the ash falling like snow from the boiling
smoke. The heat was so fierce it felt like a summer noon on Caligula.
There was no way of telling where anything or anyone was. It was as if
they had washed up in the middle of the apocalypse.
Gaunt recovered his wits enough for his hands to start to tremble. His heart
was banging like an autoloader. Limping from a wound he couldn’t remember
receiving, he hurried the other three across the twenty metres of open square
to the nearest cover. It was a burned-out RCB troop carrier. They cowered
down, scanning the nightmare around them.
“One! This is one!” Gaunt cried, and then realised the lack of response
was because his micro-bead was no longer in his ear. Its snapped flex
dangled from his collar dip.
He looked at the other three. All of them were covered in dirt and blood
and multiple minor wounds. Vanette’s jacket was shredded and blood
streamed down his right forearm from a wound at his elbow. Starck had his
head in his hands, shaking with nervous energy and adrenaline. Both still had
their lasrifles. Beltayn’s grazed, cut hands were empty. He sat with his back
against the troop carrier wreck, staring out at the firestorms with the blank
look of a man who had reached his limits.
“Vox?” Gaunt said, shaking him.
“Sir?”
“Vox?”
Beltayn shook his head. A las-round had blown the vox-caster off his back
during the melee in the hab.
Melee, Beltayn thought. How inadequately did that stupid fething word
describe what they’d just come from.
“Micro-bead, then? Beltayn? Beltayn!”
The signalman snapped out of it. He fumbled to his ear and started to call
into his intercom.
Gaunt heard the clanking even before Starck called him. Two hundred
metres north of them, across the shattered square, an Imperial light tank was
reversing hard, smashing debris and ruined vehicles out of its way. As Gaunt
watched, an AP shell hit the pavement beside it, showering it with dirt and
stone, and then another blew its turret in half. It veered wildly, trailing thick
smoke, and came to a halt. Gaunt saw the driver struggle clear. The man
started to run, then fell as small-arms fire cut him down.
Two Blood Pact battle tanks, with a stalk-tank clattering up on their left
flank, advanced into the square. The tanks rocked as they fired, sending
shells screaming over Gaunt and his comrades and into the buildings on the
south face of the plaza. Loose formations of Blood Pact fire-teams were
hurrying forward with the armour. Whilst Gaunt and his platoon had been
caught up in the hell of the fabricatory fight, the battle outside had been lost.
The enemy had broken the Imperial resistance, crushed the armour, and was
storming down Principal I.
Las-fire began to hit the bodywork of the troop carrier. It was coming
sidelong, from the ruined hab. The Blood Pact unit that had driven first
platoon from its position — and most likely slaughtered them all — was now
spilling out of the hab over the shelled wall the way Gaunt and his men had
come. They were shooting across the open ground towards the huddled
Imperials.
The four of them scrambled around into cover at the rear of the carrier, but
even that offered precious little protection from the crossfire To their right,
the main advance and the rolling armour; to their left, the flank push of the
infantry.
Vanette and Starck returned fire with their lasrifles, concentrating on the
enemy unit advancing from the hab. Gaunt wished he had something more
than his sword left. Beltayn gave up with the micro-bead and took out his
service pistol, squeezing off shots around the end of the truck. The wrecked
vehicle shuddered as incoming fire struck it, denting the metal and spalling
off the scorched paintwork.
“Starck! Vanette! A pistol, either of you!”
Starck had lost his — lost the entire holster, in fact — but Vanette
unshipped his laspistol and slid it across the rockcrete to Gaunt. Gaunt
sheathed his sword and ducked down by the buckled rear wheel, taking shots
at the main advance. By the counter display on the pistol’s butt, he had about
thirty shots left before the cell expired.
Thirty shots. That was the measure of life left to him.
“Munitions?” he shouted over the crackle of enemy fire.
“One cell left!” replied Vanette.
“Half a cell!” reported Starck.
“Two clips!” Beltayn stammered.
“Make them count,” said Gaunt.
The fire they were receiving was getting heavier. Both infantry fronts were
targeting the troop carrier, and the stalk-tank had begun to spit cyclic pulses
at them. The wreck rattled and shook, and actually moved more than once
under the impacts. Bodywork casing fragmented off into the air.
Beltayn howled out as a piece of shrapnel tore into his arm. Vanette’s
cheek was scorched by spall bursting from a hull-strike. Any moment now,
Gaunt knew, a tank round or a rocket grenade would finish them off.
Ten shots left.
“Sabbat Martyr,” Gaunt began to murmur, “in the name of the hallowed
Emperor of Terra, deliverer of the Imperium of Man, I commend my soul and
my dying deeds, and the souls of these three brave soldiers, into your hands
that you—”
Fire sheeted across the square from the south, cones of flame, white hot
and hungry, spraying like water from pressure hoses, it gushed across the
archenemy troops emerging from the hab and turned those that didn’t break
and flee into jerking, stumbling torches.
“Something…” Beltayn gasped. “Something’s…”
Not awry. Not by any stretch of the imagination.
Four Chimeras, displaying the insignia of the lord general’s life company,
stormed into the square, crashing through burning buildings with their toothed
dozer blades. They were moving fast, their hulls rocking back on their treads
as they accelerated out of the rubble. In their top turrets, troopers manned the
autocannons, blazing tracer fire into the air. Behind the fast, armoured
carriers, lumbering tanks emerged. Civitas Beati armour, PDF lights and two
life company Vanquishers. They began firing as soon as they had visual target
on the enemy vanguard. Flooding in around the vehicle charge were troopers,
many carrying company banners, flags and aquila standards on long poles.
Leading the ground troops with a standard clenched in one hand, Gaunt could
see Marshal Biagi. He was striding forward at the head of a dozen officers of
the Regiment Civitas. They were razing the ground before them with their
flamer packs.
The four Ghosts crawled under the wreck for safety as shells and heavy
cannon fire whipped over their heads in both directions. The noise and
concussion were physically painful. From where he lay, Gaunt could see
Biagi directing the ground forces forward. Someone, Lugo himself most
probably, had mobilised all the reserves into this counter-push. The damn
fool! If this failed, there would be nothing, absolutely nothing, left to defend
the inner hives with.
Gaunt knew Lugo was hardly the most gifted tactician ever to emerge from
officer candidate scholam, but this was an act of madness even by his dismal
standards. Already this night they had been surprised at the sheer scale of the
advance force the archenemy had managed to land on Herodor. Who was to
say that another force of equal size wasn’t now waiting to strike at the
southern agriponic zone, or another poised in the Eastern Obsidae? What
would Lugo do then, if his entire military strength was committed here?
It was madness. It was…
…it was madness, but not the kind Gaunt supposed.
He blinked.
Something odd was happening. Every sound was dulling, everything in
sight beginning to shimmer. Shards of glass on the floor under his bloodied
hands twinkled like diamonds. The scabby metal of the tailgate above his
head looked like mother of pearl. Tank shells slid overhead in perfect clarity,
leaving slow billows in their wake, the smoke turning and spiralling into
perfect double-helix trails.
Everything seemed to slow down.
Feth!
For a moment Ibram Gaunt thought he’d been shot. He felt no pain, no
impact, but he’d heard invalided veterans describe the way really bad
wounds happened without you knowing it, turning the world into a slow
motion wonderland as your failing senses registered the simple, profound
splendour in everything.
There was a light in his eyes. A golden light. A life company Salamander,
squat and heavy on its tracks, rolled up into his view, coming to a halt just a
few metres from where he lay under the wrecked carrier. A figure stood
upright in its open-topped cabin.
She was beautiful.
She wore a suit of intricately-worked golden battle armour so fine and
form-fitting that it had been clearly fashioned for her by master metallurgists.
Pieces of polished chelon shell had been set into the bodice and wide
pauldrons. Imperial eagles formed the couters at the elbows and the poleyns
at the knees, and the same symbol was also etched in repeated ribbons down
the thigh plates and along the vambraces. Her left hand was covered with a
gilded glove that had silver eagle claws extending from the fingertips. Her
right hand was bare. Beneath the dazzling golden plate, she wore a suit of
tightly-wound black mail, each link formed in the shape of an islumbine
bloom. A white skirt, long and flowing and fixed with purity seals and prayer
streamers, billowed from her waist. The heavy golden gorget rose up high to
her chin, but her head was uncovered. She’d cut her hair short, sheared it off
crudely in fact, so it fell in a glossy black bowl over her pale head. Her eyes
were green, as green as an infardi’s silk, as green as the rainwoods of Hagia.
The Beati looked down at Gaunt. A halo of light surrounded her, so fierce
and bright it made her seem almost translucent. Nine cyber-skull drones
hovered around her in the radiant glow, forming a circle behind her head,
their eyes lit, their miniature weapon pods armed. She was terrible to
behold.
She smiled.
“I’ve been waiting for this, Ibram. Haven’t you?”
“Yes,” was all he could say. He realised he was weeping, but he didn’t
care.
She raised her arms wide. A green cloak unfurled from her back and
became wings. A perfect aquila form spread out around her, five metres on
either side, not silk but shimmering green light. Behind her head, the doubleheads
of the Imperial eagle clacked and hissed, encircled by the skull drones.
Gaunt got to his feet. He was so intent on her he knocked his head against
the rear fender of the carrier, but his eyes didn’t waver from the vision
before him.
He drew his sword and held it out to her, grip first.
“You’ll need that Ibram,” she admonished quietly, and drew her own
blade. It was slender, silver and well over a metre long. Islumbine garlands
were looped around the hilt and jewelled pendants dangled from the pommel.
She activated it and the blade thrummed into life.
“Let us educate the archenemy of mankind,” she said.
“What lesson do we teach?” Gaunt asked.
“The Emperor protects,” she said.
She raised the sword and pointed it at the enemy. The unseen driver
slammed the Salamander forward but she didn’t even stir. On either side,
Imperial warriors surged forward towards the recoiling foe. Flamers hissed,
cannons barked, lasguns cracked and the heavy tank guns roared. The
Imperial banners fluttered.
Sword in hand, Gaunt ran after her.

FIVE
TRIUMPHS AND MIRACLES
“Where there is an enemy, rage! Where there is a victory, rejoice!”
—Saint Sabbat, Epistles
There were crowds everywhere.
It was barely daybreak, but the streets were packed. Teeming masses of
chanting pilgrims, celebrating soldiers and rejoicing citizens dogged the
transitways and boulevards of the Civitas Beati, united in a raucous and
unstinting expression of triumph. The wounded city had woken up to find it
was, miraculously, still alive.
Wide slicks of black smoke stained the early daylight, wiping deep
smudges across the flat cold whiteness of the sky. Outlying northern sectors
of the city were still-burning ruins littered with wrecked war machines and
the uncounted bodies of the dead.
An early estimate suggested hundreds of military personnel and citizens
had perished. The pilgrim community had suffered the most. Thousands had
not made it through the gruelling night.
But the body count and the serious destruction inflicted on the Civitas
seemed to bother no one in the crowd. They were as abnormally excited now
as they had been inexplicably deflated in the small hours of the night. Easy to
explain perhaps, for humans are simple things: they were alive, they had
won, and they were rejoicing in that fact.
The greatest concentration of people was mobbing in around Beati Plaza,
hundreds of thousands of exhilarated human beings, all of them chanting and
whooping and dancing and cheering. Banners were flapping in the dawn air,
white petals swirling like confetti from the garlands the people wore
Soldiers, their grinning teeth white against the caked dirt on their faces, were
hugged and kissed, and lifted up on shoulders. Drums pounded. The ancient
prayer horns of the city boomed Fabricatory sirens wailed.
People had got up on roofs and balconies, or waved eagerly from upper
floor windows. Streamers and fireworks flashed in the sky. On several street
corners approaching the plaza, infardi preachers had climbed up onto the
carts of their clock shrines and were leading prayers and hymn singing.
Eccesiarchy processions, led by choirs, carried reliquaries from the hive
shrines through the streets. Ministorum workers scattered petals and flower
heads harvested at random from the agriponic farms.
By the time Gaunt reached the heaviest crowds in the plaza area, he had
garlands of islumbine and irridox around his neck, and had been kissed and
hugged more times than he could count. His clothes were ragged and torn and
he was covered in cuts and bruises. He still carried the aquila standard that
he’d picked up from a fallen RCB trooper in the thick of the fighting before
daybreak.
He felt strange, dazed, dislocated. The noise of the jubilation around him
seemed louder and more oppressive than the bitter warfare of the night.
Everything felt like a dream, but that was just his fatigue, he was sure.
On the cold, flinty plain of the Great Western Obsidae, as dawn came up,
he had helped undertake the extinction of the enemy forces. There had been
no quarter, and that was all right, for the Blood Pact were devoted and sworn
servants of the archenemy of mankind.
But they had slaughtered them. All of them.
The glass fields beyond the city’s north-western perimeter were scattered
with corpses and with the smouldering hulls of fighting vehicles. Faced with
the Beati, and with the renewed vigour she had inspired in the warriors of the
Imperium, the Blood Pact had snapped and run. Biagi and Kaldenbach, the
acknowledged victors of the fight, had led the pursuit and annihilated the
enemy in the obsidae Now the winds of the ice-desert, gusting in over the
Western Ramparts, would shrivel the Blood Pact bodies, and the ground frost
freeze-dry their flesh, and they would remain as fragile mummies amidst the
litter of their ruined armour, a testimony to the brutal zeal of an Imperial army
inspired by faith.
Gaunt reached the plaza. The crowds were packed fifty deep, but they
parted to let him through. Pilgrims and citizens reached out to touch him or to
clap him on the shoulders. He was limping and using the banner for support.
She was at the centre of the plaza, standing on top of a Chimera, raising
her hands to the exulting crowds.
“Sir! Sir!” Gaunt glanced around and was almost knocked over by
Raglon’s enthusiastic hug of a greeting.
“We feared you were dead, sir!” Raglon cried.
“I’m not, Rags.”
“I see that, sir. God-Emperor, it’s good to see you! What a day this is!
What a moment!”
Gaunt smiled a tired smile. Raglon’s excitement was contagious. Too
seldom had he seen his men filled with the simple joy of victory.
“How’s your platoon. Rags?”
“In fine shape, sir.”
“They came through it all right?”
Raglon nodded eagerly. “We came through. No losses. But we gave them
hell. I’ll be filing a report… recommendations…”
“I look forward to it.”
Raglon turned and looked towards the centre of the plaza. “I can’t believe
this, sir,” he said. “I mean… she’s here. Really here.”
“Yes, she is, Rags,” he said. “She really is. Enjoy this moment. They don’t
come often in our walk of life.”
Gaunt looked at the Saint as Raglon pulled away, laughing. She seemed to
be staring directly at him.
“I’m happy and all, but I wish she’d stop doing that.”
“Doing what?” asked Feygor, raising his voice to be heard over the din.
“Looking at me like that,” replied Rawne. Third platoon were in the
crowd on the far side of the plaza from Gaunt. “She won’t stop looking at
me.”
“It’s me she’s looking at,” Feygor said. “Not you. Why would she look at
you?”
“Well, I don’t know…” Rawne said, rolling his eyes.
“I do,” said Banda. “The major’s sex on legs, real catnip for us
womenfolk.”
Feygor laughed. Rawne looked at Banda with disdain.
“But I hate to disappoint you,” Banda continued. “Her holiness the Beati is
actually looking at me.”
“It is a good day,” said Gol Kolea quietly.
“Yes, Gol, it is,” Criid replied. She patted him on the arm. Around them,
the crowd was going mad with chants. The Beati was a distant figure at the
heart of the packed square.
“A good day,” Kolea repeated. “She looks at me and sees me and sees I’m
happy that it’s a good day.”
“Who does, Gol?”
“The sainty-woman.”
“Uh huh.”
“Hey, sarge.” Criid looked round and saw Jajjo shouldering his way
through the press. “Found him,” he said, with a grin.
Caffran appeared behind Jajjo and grabbed Criid in a tight embrace.
“Thought I’d lost you!” he breathed, kissing her cheek and neck. He raised
a hand and gently touched the bandage around her head.
“You’re hurt.”
“Nothing that won’t mend. Kolea got me to a medic.”
“I din’t think I’d ever see you again, Tona,” Caffran said.
“It’ll take more’n a few Blood Pact to keep me from you,” she replied and
met his mouth with hers.
“Yeah, yeah… not in front of the troops,” said Lijah Cuu as he wandered
past.
“See her?”
“Of course I do.”
“Then be thankful,” said Colm Corbec, “your little nightmare was just
that… a little nightmare There she is. Alive and well and… saintly.”
Milo nodded. “Yes, I suppose so. She’s amazing. She seems to be looking
right at me.”
“At you? At me, more like. Right at me.”
Milo smiled. “Believe what you want, colonel.”
“I believe I will.”
“That she’s looking at you?” scoffed Mkoll dryly. “I think she’s certainly
looking at me.”
The vast crowd around them suddenly sent up a booming cheer and the
Ghosts in their midst joined in.
“Me, definitely,” murmured Mkoll.
Larkin stared. It was like he had her in his crosshairs and she had him the
same. If it had been a kill-sight, it would have been tough. Ninety metres,
with a crosswind and hundreds of cheering bodies between him and her. But
he’d have made it. Larkin was sure.
And even more sure that she’d have made it too. The way she looked at
him. Like a marksman.
Hark pushed through the crowd. He almost fell over Daur, who was sobbing
his heart out, and then bumped into Meryn, who was just staring.
“Meryn?”
“She’s real.”
“I think that’s the idea, sergeant.”
Beside them, Sergeant Varl had climbed up on a clock shrine cart and
started to dance, putting on a beret plumed with struthid feathers and pulling
it down comically over his ears.
Hark laughed despite himself.
“Chief?” Vivvo handed Soric the brass message shell.
“Thank you,” Soric said, and nodded Vivvo away. The crowd around them
was going crazy. The cheering was so loud it was making him twitchy.
Soric undid the shell’s cap and used his fingers as tweezers to fish the note
out.
It said: It’s you she’s looking at. She knows.
Soric dropped the paper scrap and pushed the message shell into his
pocket.
A moment later and Vivvo re-emerged from the bustling crowd.
He held out a message shell.
“This yours, chief?” he asked.
Soric patted his pant pockets. They were empty.
“Must be,” he said.
Vivvo handed him the shell and turned away. He glanced back over his
shoulder. Soric knew Vivvo was catching on.
Soric opened the shell. This one said: Tell Gaunt. Nine are coming. Nine
are coming.
The handwriting was hasty. Really rushed and badly formed, like he’d
been writing in a hurry.
Despite the celebration around him, Soric felt his heart sink.
The little glade was quiet. It was a spring morning, early, the first rays of
sunlight gleaming through the leaves. A vague mist covered the path to the
chapel door.
Each step he took sounded too loud in the cool silence. There were no
birds singing. That seemed odd. His boots crunched on the stone pavers.
His pulse was racing. There was nothing to be afraid of, but he was afraid
anyway. Why was that? He wanted to be here. He wanted to go inside, but
his heart was thumping.
He reached the door. Dew glittered on the iron handle. He reached out to
take hold of it, but the door began to open of its own accord. It began to open
and behind it he saw—
Gaunt woke with a start. He had to fight to catch his breath. The room around
him was dark and over-warm. He had no idea what time it was.
He got up off the bed and started to walk towards the windows to open the
shutters. Only then did he feel the terrible aches of his tired body. Every step
was painful.
He opened a shutter, and white light shafted into the small chamber.
Outside it was late afternoon, and the sweep of the cityscape below showed
that the celebration was still going on. He could see banners, the occasional
spark of a firework, and crowds still streaming along the narrow streets.
He fiddled with the climate control vents built into the window sill, but no
amount of jiggling eased the oppressive heat. He wished he could open the
chamber window, but it was a hermetically sealed unit. This level of hive
tower three was too high above the city shield and the Civitas’ atmosphere
envelope.
Gaunt tried to remember the dream he’d been having. It had been so vivid,
but it had melted away the moment he woke. Aexe Cardinal. He had been
back on Aexe Cardinal, at the chapel. More than that, he couldn’t say.
He caught sight of his own reflection in the heavy dressing mirror in the
corner of the room. He was dressed only in his under shorts, and his lean,
muscled flesh looked unnaturally pale and white. The dark furrows of old
scars looked like relief features on the surface of a chalky moon, especially
the long, ugly rip across his belly that Dercius had left him with so many
years before.
The newer wounds, the ones Herodor had given him, were more livid. So
many abrasions and scratches he didn’t care to count, scabbing black with
blood. Bruises too, dark black and sickly yellow. The most serious were the
las-burn across the top of his left shoulder and the gash in his right calf. Lesp
had cleaned him up pretty well, dressed the worst and sutured a few of the
deepest cuts.
He limped out of the bedchamber into the outer room. His personal effects
had been set out on the dresser and his spare uniform was laid out over the
back of the chair.
“Beltayn?” he called out There was no sign of his adjutant.
He was dressing when the door opened and Rerval came in.
“Sorry, sir. I should have knocked. Thought you were asleep.”
“As you were.”
Rerval, Corbec’s signalman and adjutant, entered and closed the door. He
was carrying a musette bag.
“Where’s Beltayn?” Gaunt asked.
“He was bushed, sir. Corbec ordered him to billets and asked me to cover.
I hope that’s all right.”
Gaunt nodded, buttoning up his dress jacket.
“How long have I been asleep?”
“About four hours, sir. Everything’s calming down a bit. Captain Daur’s
running things in operations.”
“Have we got any numbers yet?”
“Not for me to say, sir. Lugo’s throwing a banquet tonight, which you’re
expected to attend.”
“Do you mean Lord General Lugo, Rerval?”
Rerval blushed. His cheeks went red apart from the white puckering of the
long scar he’d taken across the face on Aexe. “I do, sir.”
“I don’t honestly care what you call him… except a bad habit might get
you into trouble.”
“I’ll remember that sir.”
Gaunt finished buttoning his jacket and started to look around for his cap.
Rerval reached into the musette bag he was carrying.
“Looking for this, sir?”
The cap was a little dusty and the worse for wear, though Rerval had done
his best to clean it up.
“Colonel Corbec sent a scout back to the hab to find it, sir. No sign of your
bolt pistol though, I’m afraid, so I requisitioned you this for the time being.”
Rerval produced a brand new laspistol in a black leather holster.
“Thank you, Rerval,” said Gaunt, strapping it on. He buckled on his
sheathed sword and warknife too and then put on his cap. Then he paused.
“I… I must have lost my cape somewhere along the way,” he said ruefully.
He felt ashamed to admit it.
Rerval took off his own camo-cape. “Take mine, sir. Please, it’d be an
honour. I’ll get myself another.”
Gaunt took the trademark Tanith garment and nodded his thanks. Rerval’s
gift was astonishingly generous, given how fiercely the Tanith protected their
knives and capes.
“How do I look?” Gaunt asked.
“Like a conqueror of worlds, sir.”
“Very kind. How do I look really?”
“Tired, sir.”
The operations centre was quiet. Only half the console positions were
manned, and in most cases it was Munitorum clerics who were on duty. Daur
was sitting in the side annexe, working his way through a stack of data-slates.
He started to get up when he saw Gaunt enter, but Gaunt waved him back
into his seat.
“Long night, Ban. How’re you holding up?”
Daur smiled reassuringly. “I came through pretty much intact. Feel like a
million credits now. You?”
“Weary, but a victory is a victory. Puts fire into even the most exhausted
bones.”
“Not just that, though. Not just victory. I mean… after everything you said
to us in here yesterday. You were wrong, weren’t you?”
Gaunt sat down beside him. “About the Beati?”
Daur nodded. “I saw her. We all did. In the fight and afterwards, down at
the triumph. That was no fraud.”
Gaunt sighed. “No. No, I can’t think it could have been. The moment I saw
her I was sure… as sure as I had been yesterday she wasn’t real.”
“You must have been mistaken yesterday, sir,” Daur said.
“Do me a favour, Ban? Keep an open mind. The girl I met yesterday was
not the Martyr. I know that in my heart as well as I know anything. For all her
passion and conviction and self-belief, she was not the real thing. The
woman who appeared last night… well, she was everything the other had not
been. I don’t know what happened… but something very strange took place
as the battle was raging.”
“Thank the God-Emperor for that!”
“Indeed, the Emperor protects. But keep an open mind.”
“Because what can change one way might change back?”
“Quite so. Now why don’t you bring me up to speed on the situation?”
Daur handed Gaunt a data-slate imprinted with the general operations
report. “I’ve rotated every Ghost who saw action last night off active to rest
and resupply. Marshal Biagi wanted some bodies to add to his perimeter
patrols, but Lord General Lugo seems to think we’ve got nothing to worry
about now, so he went easy. Everyone’s in billets, either standing ready or
sleeping. Except those in the infirmary.”
“How many?”
“Thirty-nine Eleven serious, including Mkhef, Sapes and Bewl. And
Mkvenner.”
“Not again, not after Aexe.”
“Indeed no. He still hasn’t recovered from the pasting he took on Aexe.
Soric encountered him in the field last night and saw he was ailing, so he sent
him back to the field hospital. Dorden reckons Ven’s been pushing himself
too hard and started bleeding internally from some of the old injuries. In a
bad way, apparently.”
“How bad?”
Daur shrugged. “I’m not the chief medic.”
“Is Ven going to die?”
“Probably.”
“Feth,” Gaunt took off his cap and set it on the desk beside him. “I’ll go
and see him.”
“Make it fast. The Lord General’s summoned all the senior staff to a
banquet tonight.”
“I thought it was customary to invite officers to a banquet not summon
them.”
“I don’t believe this is optional, sir.”
Gaunt shook his head. He didn’t feel much like hobnobbing with Lugo’s
officer cadre He looked across at Daur. “I might as well get the rest of the
bad news over with now. How many fates?”
“Thirty-two,” said Daur. He passed another data-slate to Gaunt. “That’s
pending, of course. We’ve still got about twenty unaccounted for.”
The Tanith dead were listed by squad. The first six were from Gaunt’s
own platoon, number one. Reading each name gave him a twinge of pain, but
he was relieved. The storm-fight in the hab had been so vile so brutal, he’d
been expecting to see many more names there. He knew Beltayn, Vanette and
Starck had made it because they’d come out with him. It turned out that
Caober, Wersun, Myska, Derin, Neith, Lyse, Bool, Mkan and another eight
had made it out alive too.
“Mkoll says it was Caober, Derin and Lyse who led them out safe. A real
fighting retreat, well ordered despite the vicious hand-to-hand. They got them
far enough back for Mkoll’s platoon to cover them. He’s recommending
honours for the three of them. I spoke to Derin myself. It sounds like it was
hell in there.”
“It was hell everywhere, wasn’t it?”
Daur sighed. “I think so. But I get the feeling your stand in the hab there
was the worst bout of close-quarters.”
“It shouldn’t have happened. If we’d had flamers, they’d never have got
within spitting distance of staging a storm.”
“You know the rules here, sir.”
“Know ’em, loathe ’em, gonna fight to change ’em. I won’t get us caught
like that again. When the next wave comes, we’re going to be ready, and that
means flamers to the front.”
Daur picked up his caffeine and sipped it grimacing when he realised it
had gone cold. “Next wave? You think we’re honestly going to get more?”
“I have no doubt Ban,” said Gaunt getting to his feet. “We had a tough few
hours there, and I’d not want to relive them, but we’d be fools to think that
was anything except an unexpectedly heavy advance The main force is
coming. And they’ll be loaded for bear.”
“There may also be a bright side, Gaunt.”
They looked up as Viktor Hark entered the annexe. He paused to sign off
some slates a Munitorum scribe was holding for him, exchanged a few words
with the robed, implanted functionary, and then strode in to join them.
“Are you rested, sir?” Hark asked, sweeping up his coattail and seating
himself facing them.
“Well enough, thank you, Viktor. See much action?”
“In the closing stages. Enough to keep my hand in. Not enough to merit
honours. Many did though; I have a list.”
“I look forward to reading it.”
“The lord general has a list too,” said Hark. “You’re on it.”
“Me?” said Gaunt.
“Both of you. Kaldenbach and Biagi are being given the credit for winning
the fight but Lugo wants to cite you and all the other senior officers — Tanith
and Civitas alike — who were out in the thick of the first phase. But for your
actions, the lord general says, there would have been no fight left to win.
He’s called the banquet to issue the citation pins.”
Gaunt was about to retort, but he saw how pleased and excited Daur
looked and bit it back instead. He had no wish to be decorated by Lugo, but
men like Daur, Rawne and Corbec deserved the recognition. It was about
fething time.
“What did you mean when you said there was a bright side?” he asked.
“Astropathic signals from the reinforcement fleet, just received. I took the
liberty of signing them off and passing them on to Lugo. Our replenishment
will be here tomorrow at dawn, warp permitting. Nine Munitorum packets
laden with munitions and medical supplies, three regiments of Khan Heavy
Ground, and an Ardelean tank company out of San Velabo. Word is there’s a
Fleet Mechanicus pioneer ship inbound too, carrying a batch of mid-range
plasma reactors to beef up the city shield. Plus five warships and a fighter
carrier from the Segmentum battlefleet. Two days from now, Herodor’s going
to be a much tougher nut to crack.”
“Bright side indeed. What about enemy movements?”
Hark shrugged. “Nothing. The balloon went up on Khan VI last night,
according to transmits. Their far-listening stations thought they’d locked up
an incoming warfleet heading our way. Turned out to be a flotilla of pilgrim
ships from the Hagia system.”
Gaunt picked up his cap and put it on. “Consider me a great deal happier
than I was five minutes ago. I’ll be in the infirmary if anyone needs me.”
“The function starts at 20.00, sir,” Hark reminded him.
“I won’t be late.”
Gaunt left Daur and Hark talking and limped out through the quiet
operations centre. At the door, he met Sergeant Meryn on his way in. Meryn
saluted sharply.
“Problem, Meryn?”
“I was looking for Commissar Hark, actually, sir.”
“Nothing I can help you with?”
“I wouldn’t want to trouble you, sir,” said Meryn.
The primary Tanith billet was in a scholam on the thirtieth level of hive
tower three. The double-bunked dorms had been cleaned out to accommodate
the off-world troopers. The shutters were closed and the phospha lamps
turned down, and smoke from lho-sticks filled the dim air.
Soric limped down the aisle between the bunks in dorm five, exchanging
quiet greetings with those men that weren’t asleep. Many were just
unconscious, sprawled out on their cots, still wearing their battledress and
the dirt and dried blood of the night before.
Soric himself was tired, but he was edgy too and he couldn’t sleep. His
lost eye ached like a bastard.
“You all right there, chief?” Corbec called to him. Soric stopped and
stomped over to Corbec’s cot.
“Fine, Colm. Fine and dandy. You know me.”
“Indeed I do,” said Corbec. He’d been stretched back in his undershirt on
his cot, but now he sat up and pulled out a hip flask.
He offered it to Soric, who took it and sat down on the edge of the bunk.
“Good stuff,” he said, smacking his lips and handing it back. “Surely that’s
not the sacra?”
That’s what the Ghosts had begun to call it: the sacra. Several of the men,
and many of the sutlers and traders accompanying the regiment, had become
very handy at distilling the Tanith’s beloved liquor. But none of them had
quite the same knack as the lamented Bragg. His stuff had always been the
best. A few flasks of it were rumoured to remain. And that stuff, like some
mythical relic, was called the sacra.
“Indeed not,” smiled Corbec. “But I commend your palate. Not many
Verghasts can tell the difference.”
Soric shrugged. “We’re getting the taste for it. I’ve heard rumours that
Trooper Lillo is close to perfecting the first Verghast distilled brand. He’s
calling it Gak Me Number One.”
Corbec chuckled. “I know. With respect to Lillo — and let me confide in
you that he’s had me, Domor and Varl in for intensive taste tests — Gak Me
Number One will get you blind pissed and clean brushes. It is not, however,
sacra. This little job, which has, I’m sure you will agree, a fine nose an
agreeable undertaste, and a soft hint of ploins, vanilla and antifreeze, is the
product of dear old Brostin who, let’s face it, knows how to boil things. It’s
about the best there is in these dreary, post-Bragg days.”
Soric took another swig. “He’s got a bright future in illegal intoxication
head of him, that Brostin.”
“So… what’s got you wandering around at this hour?”
“Can’t sleep.”
“Me neither. Got the itch.”
“The itch?” Soric blinked his one good eye at Corbec.
“Not something I picked up from one of Aleksa’s girls, I assure you. The
combat itch. Seems like I’ve been out of it for too long. Too, too long. Oh, I
saw some shooty-shooty on Aexe, but it wasn’t after much. I feel like I need
to get back in the game.”
Soric nodded. On Phantine, both he and Corbec had been badly wounded.
It had been the latest in a long series of injuries the colonel had suffered.
He’d almost died on his medi-bed, but for Soric.
Because that had been where it had started.
Injured, Soric had suffered some kind of transformation. He couldn’t say
what exactly, and he’d kept it quiet. But it was like something inside him had
woken up. Something he knew he had to keep secret from his friends and
comrades. There had been twitches of craft in his family line, though never
enough of anything to cause trouble. He’d believed the trait had passed him
by, until the wounding on Phantine.
There, he’d known — simply known — that Corbec had been dying of a
nosocomial infection. His warning had saved Corbec’s life And that had just
been the start. Since then, the messages had been coming more and more
frequently.
Gak, but he wanted them to stop.
Still, he knew what Corbec meant. Corbec wasn’t a young man anymore
— neither of them were — and one injury too many would spell the end of
their careers. Neither of them wanted that But still…
“Don’t push it,” he said.
“What do you mean?”
“You want to prove you’re young still, young and fit. But don’t push it. The
shooty-shooty isn’t known for its mercy.”
Corbec smiled at him. “I’m first officer of the finest regiment in the
Imperium, Agun… and it’s a place I want to be for a long time. Don’t worry
about me. Me, I’m gonna live forever.”
“Make sure you do,” Soric said and got to his feet. “Milo around?”
“Down yonder,” Corbec said with a flip of his thumb.
Soric shuffled his squat bulk down the aisle. He saw Larkin fast asleep on
a lower bunk, his long-las wrapped in his arms like a favourite girl.
Soric stopped dead and slowly looked around. Something… something
nagged him. Something he didn’t even have to open his damn message shell
to know.
Two bunk rows away, he saw Lijah Cuu. Cuu was flat on his belly on a top
bunk, appearing to all around him to be asleep. But Soric could see Cuu’s
feline eyes were open, open and staring at Larkin.
He shuddered. Cuu was a piece of work. If he had it in for Larks, Soric
pitied the poor bastard sniper. Maybe he should tell someone about—
He stopped himself. Cuu was looking at him now, returning the stare. Soric
looked away and walked on. What would he tell anyone anyway? That he’d
got a feeling? A bad feeling? A handwritten note from himself saying Cuu
was a mad feth who needed to be watched at all times?
“What’s up, chief?” Soric had come to a halt next to Milo’s bunk. The
youngest Ghost had spread his Tanith pipes out on his bedroll and was
cleaning the chanters with a wire brush.
“Hello, Brinny. Got a moment?”
“Sure.”
Milo moved the chanter pipes so that Soric could sit down. The old
Verghastite pulled a scrap of blue paper from his pocket.
“I need your help. It’s a delicate matter. Can you promise me you’ll be
discreet?”
“Of course,” whispered Milo, sitting up, wondering what the hell Soric
was going to tell him.
Instead of speaking, Soric handed the scrap of paper to him.
“What’s this?”
“Read it.”
Milo did. Hand-written on the sheet was the line: Ask Milo. Trust Milo.
He’ll know. “What does that mean?” Milo asked. Soric shrugged. “Well, who
wrote it?”
“I did.”
“When?”
“I have absolutely no idea,” said Soric.
Gaunt hated combat hospitals. They reminded him too much of the
consequences of his profession.
The Civitas Beati had assigned a public health clinic on the tenth floor of
hive tower three as the Tanith infirmary. It was a spartan hall of metal tiles
and plastic screens. As he limped through the entranceway, he was assailed
by the reek of antiseptic, which was so sharp and strong it almost but not
quite masked the underlying aroma of blood and human waste.
A hand bell was ringing. Infardi volunteers and local medical staff moved
between the beds in the dim light, and in one corner an Ecclesiarchy provost
was delivering the last rites. Candles flickered under their glass hoods.
Someone was crying out with pain. Through a partly-drawn screen, Gaunt
saw Curth and Lesp fighting with a thrashing body. Blood was pooling on the
floor under the gurney.
He took off his cap and limped further into the chamber. Looking left and
right he finally located Mkvenner, lying in a cot at the far western end under
the windows. Night was falling outside, and Mkvenner’s bed was bathed in
bars of cold, blue light. Gaunt saw Kolea sitting by Ven’s side in silent vigil.
Though his mind was ruined, Kolea seemed to know things, sense things.
Gaunt was glad that Mkvenner wasn’t alone at this time.
He started to walk towards Ven’s bed when Dorden appeared from a side
room.
“Ibram,” he said, as if surprised to see Gaunt.
“Doctor. I came to check on the wounded. Ven in particular.”
Dorden nodded. There was tension between them. Both of them hated how
awkward things had become. “Look, if you’ve got a moment,” Dorden said.
“I’d like you to look in on Zweil.”
“Zweil? He was wounded?”
Dorden shook his head. “He collapsed from a stroke in the cathedral last
night.”
“Feth, why wasn’t I told?”
“I didn’t know you hadn’t been.”
“What’s the prognosis?”
“He’s stable. It’s hard to say at this early stage.”
“Any idea what caused it?”
Dorden looked at him. “Stress. Upset. I’m sure you remember that the
ayatani was fairly worked up last night.”
“Are you blaming me?”
“No, of course not!” Dorden snapped. “Not everything is about you.
Gaunt.”
Trying not to rise to this. Gaunt walked past Dorden and into the side
room. Zweil lay on his cot, as white as the sheets wrapped around him.
“Ayatani father,” Gaunt whispered, sitting down beside the bed.
“Oh, it’s you,” said Zweil. The words came out slurred. The left half of his
face seemed reluctant to move.
“How are you?”
“The feth you care!”
“I care a great deal. Stop it with the hostility, Zweil. You’ll only make
things worse.”
Zweil closed his eyes, as if in regret. “You were right,” he hissed. “I went
to see her. I met her She’s just a lie, a fething lie. Just that silly girl Sanian.
You were right.”
“I wasn’t,” said Gaunt.
Zweil turned his head slowly and looked at Gaunt.
“What?” he gasped.
“Last night she was a lie. Today, she isn’t.”
“Don’t torture him, Gaunt,” said Dorden from the shadows of the doorway
behind him.
Gaunt looked round at Dorden sharply. “Have you not seen what’s been
happening today, doctor?”
Dorden shrugged. “I’ve been busy. I understand we won.”
“The Saint is here,” Gaunt said. “She led us to that victory. I don’t
understand it at all, but it’s true.”
Dorden stepped into the room and into the light cast by the electro candles
around the old priest’s bed. “Is this another of your games?”
“You know me. I don’t play games.”
“I thought I knew you, Ibram. Aexe Cardinal proved me wrong. But… I
guess you wouldn’t.”
“Doctor, you went through hell on Hagia because you believed. I only said
what I said last night to protect your faith. Last night there was no Saint
Sabbat on Herodor, at least not one I had seen. This morning, there is.”
“I want to see her,” Zweil said suddenly.
“He’s too sick to—” Dorden began.
“I want to see her!”
“He wants to see her, and I think he should,” said Gaunt. “You too, Tolin.”
Dorden shrugged. “I don’t know…”
“Get a wheelchair. And get some orderlies to lift Zweil.” Gaunt checked
his pocket watch. It was a quarter after seven and he wasn’t even changed.
“Do it!” he insisted. He turned back and squeezed Zweil’s hand. “I’ll take
you to see her. Let me check on Ven first.”
Zweil nodded.
Gaunt limped out into the main infirmary hall and started down to
Mkvenner’s bed. Then he stopped.
Mkvenner and Kolea were gone.
The Holy Balneary was empty. There was no sound except the gentle slap of
the water in the main pool. The dim air was wreathed with steam and the
tangy smell of iron.
By the light of the fluttering candles that lined the long, limestone
staircase, Kolea helped Mkvenner plod his way down. Biolumin globes
shone on the steam below, their light picked out on the ripples of the sacred
pool.
Mkvenner coughed violently, and his hand was wet with blood as he took
it from his mouth. Kolea held on to him tightly to stop him falling.
“Take me back, Gol,” Mkvenner said, his voice husky with rattling fluid.
Kolea shook his head. “Make you better. This will, it will. It will make
you all better. It heals all the wounds. That’s what they said. You’ll see.”
“I’m tired. Too tired. I can’t…”
“Don’ you stop now, Ven. Don’ you stop. Hold me tight and I’ll get you
there. You won’ fall.”
“Gol, please. Let me die in my bed. Let me—”
He started coughing again. The wracks hit him so hard that he bent over
and blood spattered on the gleaming limestone stairs. Mkvenner sank to his
knees.
“This is madness,” Mkvenner gasped.
Kolea shook his head. “She’ll fix you better,” he said. He reached into the
pocket of his jacket and produced a truly awful plaster effigy of the Saint, a
pilgrim nick-nack. Kolea displayed it with huge pride. “Found this. Lucky
charm. Lucky lucky. Was Tona’s. In her pocket.”
“Criid?”
Kolea nodded and smiled encouragingly. “Found her hurt. Found it on her.
Lucky lucky. It kept her safe Real safe. Keep you safe too. Make you better.”
“Just take me back, Gol.”
“Saint make you better. Water make you better. You’ll see.”
Kolea put the effigy back into his coat. Mkvenner started coughing again.
More blood came up and Mkvenner’s wracks became so violent, he passed
out. Kolea bent over and picked the big Tanith up. Grunting with effort, his legs
shaking, he continued on down the steps, carrying Mkvenner in his arms.
He reached the bottom, and crossed the pool side towards the deep steps
that ran down into the fuming water.
“Make you all better,” he repeated, over and over. Mkvenner didn’t
answer. His head hung limply.
Carrying the dying scout, Kolea descended into the water, up to his shins,
his knees, his thighs, his waist. The buoyancy of the water collected
Mkvenner’s limp form up and floated him. Kolea pushed out, the water up to
his throat, keeping Mkvenner on the surface.
Blood stained out in a wide fan around them.
“Be better! Be better now!” Kolea cried out.
He looked up suddenly. On the far side of the pool, a figure had appeared,
indistinct in the smoking steam.
“Make him better!” Kolea demanded, trying to keep Mkvenner’s limp
body above the water level.
“Make him better!”
“What now? You want me to walk?” Zweil leaned forward in the bathchair
Lesp was pushing and stared at the candlelit flight of white steps below them.
They could smell the sulphurous water.
Zweil made an effort to turn his head to look up at Gaunt. “Do you expect
me to get up and walk down that?” he snarled.
“No,” said Gaunt. “Lesp? Help me.”
Between them, the Tanith commander and the slender orderly gathered
Zweil up in a chair-lift between them and started to edge down the stairs. It
was hard. Gaunt realised how unreliable his wounded leg was. If he fell
now…
Behind them, Dorden shook his head wearily and pushed the empty
bathchair to one side. Then he began to follow the others down the steps into
the humid chamber of the Holy Balneary.
“Could you stop fidgeting?” Lesp grunted.
“I’m not!” Zweil complained.
“I think you are. This isn’t easy,” said Gaunt. Sweat was beading on his
forehead from the effort, and Lesp was panting. Moisture coated every
smooth limestone stair, and every step they took was a disaster waiting to
happen.
“What… what the feth is happening down there?” Dorden said suddenly
from behind them.
Gaunt nearly fell. They were halfway down the white staircase. “Put him
down! Lesp, put him down!”
They eased Zweil’s paralysed body onto a step and let go. Lesp had to
crouch and hold on to Zweil to stop him slithering away down the stairs.
Gaunt rose and looked at what Dorden was pointing at. Below them, in the
pool, three figures were standing in the water.
“Wait here,” Gaunt said. Dorden bent down beside Lesp and helped to
keep Zweil stable The three of them watched Gaunt stagger his way down to
the pool.
Gaunt limped from the foot of the staircase to the edge of the balneary
pool. The three bodies in the water were now submerged, one of them
pressing hands down on the backs of the others’ heads to dunk them.
Or drown them. Or baptise them.
Gaunt couldn’t tell. He thumped down the bath steps into the water
himself.
The figures surfaced in a rush of bubbles and spray. Kolea. Mkvenner.
And her.
“What the hell is this?” Gaunt cried.
The Beati, dad only in a white shift, smiled at him, wiping away the water
that dripped down her face from the fringes of her bowl-cut hair.
“The water heals, Ibram,” she said.
Just the sight of her stilled his fears. He stopped where he was, the warm
water rocking against his legs.
Mkvenner turned and splashed his way towards him.
“Ven?”
Mkvenner got up on the steps and sat down, soaked through. He started to
laugh.
“Ven? Are you all right?”
Mkvenner was laughing heartily, as if at some enormous cosmic joke. A
man in his condition surely shouldn’t be able to laugh so violently. Unless…
“I told you,” said Kolea, splashing up to the foot of the steps and
clambering up beside Mkvenner. “Didn’t I tell you? Heals everything. That’s
the thing about this place, it—”
Kolea paused, and looked around, blinking in the wet air. His gaze finally
found Gaunt’s face.
“I—” he said. “Sir, I think I may have missed something. How did I get
here?”
SIX
PERTURBATION
“Bad day coming!”
—Unidentified preacher, Herodor
“Say that… again, if you please.”
Lord General Lugo exuded power and authority in his white, high-collared
dress uniform, but his tone didn’t match his appearance at all. He sounded
positively nervous.
“I said, lord, that I apologise for attending this function late, but I was
delayed by an extraordinary event in the Holy Balneary. Before my eyes, the
Beati performed a sacred miracle. Two, in fact Sacred miracles of healing.”
Gaunt paused and allowed the silence to last. The room, a high-tier
ballroom in Old Hive that Lugo’s staff had requisitioned for the banquet, was
full of formally attired officers — Herodian PDF, life company, Regiment
Civitas and Tanith — who were all staring at Gaunt and the lord general.
They’d been standing around, sipping preprandial amasecs and chatting,
when Gaunt entered, and they’d heard every word.
“A miracle? What miracle?” Lugo asked, edgily. Biagi and Kaldenbach
were nearby, and Gaunt could see Rawne, Mkoll, Daur and Hark in amongst
the gathering. Behind the huddle of officers, servitors and household staff
putting the finishing touches to the long table ceased their activity, as if
realising something was in the air.
“Two of my troopers went to the Holy Balneary tonight. One, Mkvenner by
name, was at death’s door. He was wounded on Aexe, and had never made a
full recovery. The other, Sergeant Kolea, had been left a mental cripple
during action on Phantine. It was a chronic condition that no amount of
surgery could fix. As I understand it Kolea had taken Mkvenner down the
balneary. It was an art of comradeship. I think Kolea’s simple mind had
seized on what he had been told about the holy waters and so he believed he
was doing the right thing.”
Lugo’s eyes narrowed as he listened.
“When I arrived,” Gaunt went on, “they were in the main pool, and the
Saint was present. She was with them, in the water, almost as if she was…”
“…baptising them?” murmured Biagi.
“Just so, marshal,” said Gaunt. “When it was done, both men were healed.
Completely healed.”
“You must be mistaken, sir,” said Kaldenbach.
Gaunt shook his head. “I admit, truth and falsehood seem to keep switching
places with each other here on Herodor, but I know what I saw.”
“Were you alone in witnessing this, Gaunt?” Lugo asked.
“No, sir. It was also witnessed by my chief medic, an orderly named Lesp,
and by Ayatani Zweil.”
Lugo and Biagi exchanged quick glances. Gaunt could see the disguised
unease on both their faces.
“When did this happen?” asked Lugo.
“An hour ago, sir.”
“And only now do you come here and tell me?”
Gaunt paused. “Ayatani Zweil made me conversant with the etiquette
concerning such events. I made haste to summon the senior ayatani, the
provosts of the Ecclesiarchy, and the first officiary, so that the miracles could
be corroborated and documented, and entered into the holy record, informed
church and state before you informed me?”
Gaunt nodded. “I wasn’t aware miracles were a military matter, lord.
Ayatani Zweil told me that being a site of proven miracles would greatly
increase Herodor’s significance as a sacred place This made it a matter for
the Imperial Church. All Imperial subjects are legally obliged to inform the
Ecclesiarchy of wonders and portents. And of course, it adds provenance to
the authenticity of the Beati herself.”
“She needs no provenance!” Lugo snapped.
“Sir, I don’t understand,” said Gaunt. “The Saint is reborn here on
Herodor and she has proved her divinity by performing genuine miracles.
That surely is a cause for universal rejoicing. Why do you seem angry?”
Lugo stiffened and looked around, suddenly aware of the image he was
projecting. He forced a smile. “You misunderstand me, my dear colonelcommissar.
I am just… astonished. Miracles, as you say, are beyond our
understanding, beyond the remit of normal life, and I confess I am alarmed by
anything that does not fit into the pragmatic, physical world of soldiering. I’m
sure my brothers here will agree?”
There was a general murmur of assent from around the room.
Lugo looked at Gaunt. “I’m not ashamed to admit that the notion of
miracles terrifies me. Gaunt. The unseen universe exerting its power over our
material lives. That sort of… magic is so often the stock in trade of our
archenemy. So, please forgive my tone just then. Of course it is a cause for
joyful thanks.”
It was an excellent recovery, Gaunt had to give him that much.
“I will go to the first officiary at once, and consult with him about how we
should proceed.”
The assembly saluted as Lugo strode out, Biagi at his side. Then the
chatter renewed, urgent.
“Is this true?” Hark asked softly, as he reached Gaunt’s side.
Gaunt nodded.
“But Kolea was—”
“Permanently crippled, I know. Dorden doesn’t know what happened. It’s
quite scared him.”
“And Lugo too.”
“That’s different,” Gaunt said. “I think Lugo’s scared because he was in
control of his game here until five minutes ago and now he most definitely
isn’t.”
The scars were still there: old, pink, smooth, knotted across the back of the
head from the base of the neck up to the crown. The hair had never properly
grown back through the crumpled tissue, and Kolea had kept his head shaved.
“Let me see it once more,” he said. Ana Curth paused and then lifted the
hand mirror again. Kolea craned his eyes sideways to study the marks on the
back of his skull.
“A real mess.”
“Yes, it was,” she said. She put the mirror down because her hands were
trembling and she didn’t want to drop it. “Just a few more tests,” she said,
hoping she sounded breezy.
“Haven’t you done enough?” he asked. She met his eyes and swallowed.
There was a light there, a human spark back in them that hadn’t been around
since that day on Phantine two years earlier. It was like he’d risen from the
dead, and though she was overjoyed to have him back, it terrified her. It was
beyond her professional expertise to explain it.
“Why don’t you sit down?” he suggested. “You look like you’ve seen a
ghost.”
She laughed, stupidly delighted by the awful joke, and sat on a wooden
stool facing the bedside where he was perched. The infirmary was quiet
though those patients still awake had heard what was going on and were
whispering from cot to cot. From nearby came the soft whir of a medical
resonancer as Dorden ran the machine over Mkvenner’s torso for the
umpteenth time. Dorden glanced up from his work, saw Curth looking at him,
and shrugged. They were both spooked. They’d seen plenty in their days with
the regiment but nothing like this.
“How much do you remember, Gol?” she asked.
He frowned, his lips pursed, for a brief second resembling the braindamaged
Gol Kolea, struggling to remember someone’s name or what he was
supposed to be doing.
“With any clarity, I remember a street in Ouranberg, in the habs of the
Alpha Dome. Criid was down. Hurt. Enemy fire. Those damn loxatl freaks. I
remember the impacts of their flechette blasters. That distinctive sound… the
hiss, the rattle of the shrapnel barbs. I went to get Tona. She was with Allo
and Jenk, and they were dead. She’d caught shrap in the arm and the side. It
looked bad. I picked her up and started to run. I…”
“What?”
“I don’t remember anything after that. It’s just a blur from there. You know
how when you’re swimming and you dive down, and sounds from above you
become all muffled and hollow? It feels like my memories since then are like
that. Vague, out of focus. When my head came back up out of the water in that
pool all the sounds flooded back and I remembered who I was.”
“It’s been two years.”
“Two years?” he gasped. “Tell me.”
“Tell you what?”
“Tell me where I’ve been. Tell me what happened.”
She breathed out and looked at the floor. “It was a loxatl round. It hit you
in the back of the head and… and there was nothing we could do. You nearly
died. You have to understand, Gol…”
“I understand you did your best.”
“No, I mean… this isn’t normal. You’d lost a considerable percentage of
brain tissue. Your personality was destroyed. You could barely answer to
your own name. You were just a shadow. An empty body.”
“And now I’m not.”
She stared at him. “Gol, I’ve scanned your skull with the infra-ometer and
the mag resonator. There’s no change. Your brain is still as damaged as
before. There’s been no real reconstruction, just basic tissue healing. There
is absolutely no way you should be… cogent again like this.”
Kolea reached up and ran his fingers over the mess of scar-tissue.
“You said it was a miracle.”
“It is. In the strictest, most literal sense of the word. You and Ven both.”
“That scares you.”
“Yes, it does.” He blinked at this and looked away. Curth jumped to her
feet.
“Oh, Gol! no! Don’t misunderstand me! I’m only scared of the unknown.
Dorden’s the same… God-Emperor, everyone is!”
She reached out and hugged him tightly, pecking a quick kiss on his cheek
before pulling away again.
“But we’re fething glad to have you back.”
He smiled. The old smile. The one she’d once been rather keen on.
“Tell me the rest,” he said. “Where is this place again?”
“Herodor,” she said.
“And before that we were where?”
“On Aexe Cardinal. Trench war.”
He nodded slowly. “I have a vague, muffled recollection of mud and
water. And bombardment. Huge bombardment. Who’s been leading the
squad?”
“Criid,” Curth said and laughed when he opened his mouth in surprise.
“First female sergeant Things have moved along a bit in two years. Jajjo
made scout.”
“Our first Verghast scout? Oh Holy Terra…” Kolea murmured, genuinely
moved and proud. “About gakking time.”
“Muril almost made the grade too. She was in the program, and Ven says
he would have recommended her to the specialty.” Girth’s face darkened.
“But she died on Aexe.”
“Who else?” he asked quietly. “Get it over with. Who else have we lost
while I was in the dark?”
“So… can I go?” asked Mkvenner.
Dorden was packing up the instruments and glanced over at him. “You
seem astonishingly unmoved by this, Ven,” he said. He was trying to
disconnect the power lead from the base of the resonator paddle, but his
mind was everywhere and he couldn’t remember how the lead-lock worked.
He had to put the device down quickly so Mkvenner wouldn’t notice his
distraction.
Mkvenner shrugged. “You say I’m fit?”
“Rudely healthy. There’s no trace of any internal bleeding. There’s not
even a residue of blood pooled in your abdomen.”
Mkvenner started to pull on his black vest. “So I can go?”
“Do you know what just happened?”
“Yes,” said Mkvenner.
“Well, I fething don’t! Explain it to me.”
Mkvenner shrugged again. “It is my honour to serve the Imperium of Man,
and in so doing the God-Emperor who protects us all. Tonight, in his infinite
wisdom, he spared me, and he did so through the instrument of his chosen
one. I’m not going to argue with that. I’m not going to be scared by that,
either.”
“Yes, but—”
“There are no ‘buts’, Dorden. We fight the archenemy because we believe
in the Holy Truths. Terrible things happen, unnatural things, warp-magic
things, and we accept them because we believe. Now a good thing happens
and you think we should question it?”
Dorden frowned. “No, put like that.”
Mkvenner looked up. There were sounds coming from outside Voices.
“Stay here,” Dorden said, and walked towards the infirmary exit.
A crowd was gathering in the torch-lit hall outside the hospital facility.
Dorden saw huddles of ayatani and esholi, groups of ecclesiarchs and
adepts, even a few infardi. Most of them had prayer beads, pilgrim badges,
ampullas of holy water or placard boards with pictures of the Saint pasted
onto them. Some were incanting, or swinging incense burners. Many carried
votive candles.
“What is this?” he asked.
“We want to see the Miraculous,” said one ecclesiarch.
“That’s not possible. This is a hospital, and there are sick men here who
need rest.”
“The Saint has touched men here!” an ayatani declared. “We must have
audience with these men and test them for faith and truth.”
“Go away,” said Dorden.
Ayatani Kilosh moved towards him through the gathering crowd.
“Show me the men,” he said to the old doctor.
“Can’t this wait?”
Kilosh shook his head. “Corroboration must be had and witnessed, and
testimony recorded so that these miracles may be written into the holy
record.”
“Why?”
“Why? Doctor, if a plague breaks out do you not try to contain it, identify it
and document it for the good of the Imperium?”
Dorden blinked. “Of course.”
“Well, a wonder has happened here that has profound significance for the
Church of Man. We must investigate it and document it so we can understand
fully what it means. The God-Emperor has spoken to us, and we need to find
out what it is He has said.”
Dorden sighed. “Just you then, Ayatani Kilosh. You and your scribes. I
will not have the other patients discomforted.”
The air was heavy with the hot smell of baking bread. Down the promenade
from the scholam where the Tanith were billeted there was an arcade of
merchant shops — a weaver, a milliner, a measure-arbitrator, a meat-packer
and a bakery. It was nearly dawn, and a civic light-keeper, a long-bodied
servitor, was clunking down the arcade, adjusting the wall-mounted phospha
lamps to the day setting. The bakery was the only business up at that hour.
The ovens were running in the back of the store, and the lamps were lit in the
windows. In less than an hour, the hive’s morning function pattern would
begin, and the area would be busy with workers walking from their habs to
the main-hive elevator banks to get to work. The bakery, which did a busy
trade every morning in breakfast rolls and sugar-loaves, was preparing for
the morning rush.
This early, it was still eerily empty. The antique speaker horns along the
promenade were playing the same soft music they had been broadcasting
throughout the night cycle, and the public address screens were scrolling
random, soothing texts from the Imperial creed.
It reminded Soric of Vervunhive. He felt sadly nostalgic. He’d always
loved this time, the early calm at the start of a day in the hive, the brief hiatus
between night shift and day shift He remembered rising at this time, walking
to work, purchasing caffeine and a sosal from the food-house on his habblock,
seeing the open gates of the smeltery as he approached.
He’d knocked on the door of the bakery and got the bleary assistant to sell
him some soft dough-twists, still warm from the ovens. Not sosals, but still…
Now he and Milo sat under the gantries of the upper walkway, munching the
food. A pair of arbites wandered past but they didn’t spare them a second
glance Two off-duty soldiers, heading home after a night in the taverns.
“So… you think you’re a psyker?”
Soric’s mouth turned into a firm, upside-down U. “That’s not what I said,
Brin.”
“But you’re worried about these… these happenings?”
“Of course I am! Worried… terrified.”
Milo ate the last of his dough-twist and wiped his mouth on his sleeve.
“You know what happens, chief.”
“I know. I know, gak it.”
“Seriously, I don’t know why you’re talking to me.”
“Because—”
“Because this said so?” Milo produced the crumpled blue paper from his
pocket.
“I don’t want to die, Milo,” Soric said.
“No one said anything about d—”
Soric shook his head. “A bullet in the head. That’s what I’ll get. They
don’t even have to prove anything. If anyone thinks, or even thinks they think,
that I’m touched by the warp, I’ll be executed. No hesitation.”
“Gaunt wouldn’t—”
“Wouldn’t he? It’s his job. It’s the duty of every one of us. If I found out
one of my boys was touched, I’d do them myself. No question. I’m not an
idiot. You don’t take chances with gak like that.”
Milo thought for a moment. “By rights, then, I should shoot you. Or report
you at least. Why have you trusted me?”
“I heard things.”
“Heard what?”
“Things. Things about you. I thought you might be sympathetic. I thought
you might know what to do.”
“Why?”
“Because you’re still here. Gaunt never shot you.”
Milo widened his eyes. “Chief, I’d be lying if I said you don’t scare me.
The feth you’ve told me tonight… I should be running away and screaming
for you to be gunned down.”
“But you’re not.”
“No. I was interrogated. By an inquisitor. Did you know that?”
Soric blanched. “No!”
“Back on Monthax. It was before your time. Before Verghast. Right from
the Founding, I was regarded as a bit of a lucky charm. You know the story.”
“Corbec told me a little. You were the only civilian to get off the world
alive.”
“Right.”
“Because of Gaunt.”
“Right He saved my life I was the only non-com to make it off Tanith. And
the youngest. All the men looked at me like I was special, like I was a little
piece of Tanith, saved and preserved.”
“But you were special, weren’t you?”
Milo sniggered. “Oh, yes. A kid, surrounded by grown-up soldiers that I so
desperately wanted to impress. Corbec, Cluggan, Rawne — I guess. Gaunt
himself, certainly. I loved the fact they paid attention to me, took me
seriously. I think I milked it a bit.”
“Milked it?” Soric sat back.
“I had a knack of knowing things. Well, that’s what they all thought I was
the mascot, the lucky charm. If I had a funny feeling, they all took notice of it.
Believe me, chief, it was child’s play.”
“You faked it? Gak!”
Milo shook his head. “No, no… nothing like that. I did get a feeling every
now and then. A sense of premonition. But look at it this way. I was a kid,
following men round into war zones. Shit was likely to happen at any moment
Bombardments. Raids. Sneak attacks. I mean, probability law alone means I
got it right a lot of the time. I was scared and jumpy. When I jumped, the men
listened. When I jumped and they listened and something happened… well,
bingo. As far as they were concerned, I was a lucky charm who had a sixth
sense for danger. You know troopers, chief. They’re a superstitious lot.”
“Gak me,” said Soric, deflated. “So it was all a turn. Little Brinny-boy
doing his thing so the troops would love him.”
“Not quite,” said Milo. “Are you going to finish that?” he asked, nodding
at the half-eaten twist in Soric’s hand.
Soric shook his head and passed it to Milo.
“There were times,” Milo said, through a mouthful, “there were times
when it seemed real. I know Gaunt was worried. He didn’t know what to do.
If I did have a touch about me, he knew he’d have no choice but to execute
me. But he didn’t dare.”
“Because?”
“Come on, chief! I was the kid, the lucky mascot, the last living civilian
from Tanith. What the feth would it have done to the Ghosts’ morale if he’d
shot me?”
“I see your point…”
“Anyway, this inquisitor got wind of it. Varl had been playing on my rep to
stage a few ‘entertainments’ on the troop transport and some of the other
regiments got nervous. I was reported. Next thing I know, I was in front of
this inquisitor.”
“I’ve never had the pleasure. Was he a bastard? I’ve heard they are.”
“He was a she. Lilith. But yes, she was a bastard. Put me through the
wringer. Gaunt was there Tried his best to keep me out of the crap.”
“And?”
“And… she did her job, Agun. She got to the truth and uncovered it. She
found out I was a fake and exposed me. And that’s why I’m still alive.”
Soric breathed heavily and rubbed his dry hands together. “You were a
fake…”
“Not deliberately. I had been starting to believe myself. But she got the
truth out. And I realised I’d been playing with fire. If that’s all this is, chief,
stop now.”
“It isn’t,” said Soric. He reached into the thigh pocket of his fatigue pants
and fished out a crumpled packet of lho-sticks.
“I thought you’d given those up.”
“So did I,” Soric said, lighting one. “They help with the headaches. I get
this pain across my skull, and in my dead eye.” He reached up with his left
hand and splayed the fingers across his scarred head. “It hurts, a lot.”
“You should tell Gaunt,” said Milo.
“About my headaches?”
“About everything. Tell him. If I know anything about Gaunt it’s that he’s
no bastard. He’ll protect you. He’ll do what is necessary to keep you safe
without breaking Imperial law.”
“The black ships…” Soric murmured.
“Maybe. I don’t know. All I know is, I’m not touched. Never was. I’m not
in any way special But I know how hard it can get if they suspect you. So tell
Gaunt. Maybe that’s why the message told you to speak to me. Sound
advice.”
Soric exhaled a plume of fragrant smoke. “I need to do something. The
messages are getting…”
“What?”
“More urgent. I’ve had a warning. I don’t know what it means, but it’s
gonna be bad. I have to tell someone… Gaunt, who knows? But if I tell, that’s
the end for me. Goodbye, Agun, nice to have known you. I don’t know,
Brinny. Should I be looking after myself or looking to the greater good?”
Milo got up, dusting crumbs from his lap. “I think you know the answer to
that, chief.”
Milo walked away down the promenade.
Soric sat for a moment in silence. “All right already!” he hissed, reaching
into his leg pouch. The brass shell had been wriggling like a rat.
He unscrewed it and routinely tipped out the note.
Nine are coming. Stop gakking around and be a man. Milo can be trusted,
but he’s lying. He IS special. Don’t tell him. Don’t scare him. The clock’s
reached midnight.
“I presume you have a pass, trooper?”
Milo stopped in his tracks in the scholam entrance.
“Sir?”
Hark stepped out of the shadows. “An exeunt pass, permitting you to stray
from quarters.”
“I haven’t sir.”
Hark nodded. “Who were you with?”
“No one, sir. I was just taking a walk.”
“With Sergeant Soric. I saw you.”
“It’s nothing, sir.”
Hark raised a gloved hand and beckoned Milo over to him with one
crooked finger.
“I will judge what is something and what is nothing. I have my eye on
Soric.”
“Why, sir?”
Mark’s eyes were hooded. “Reports. I don’t intend to divulge my sources
to a common trooper.”
“Of course not, sir.”
“You lead a charmed life, Brin Milo. The Tanith dote on you. Gaunt dotes
on you. All I care about is the well being of this regiment. Its health…
spiritual, physical… mental. I believe that you, like any of the Ghosts, would
tell me if there was something — wrong — going on. It would be your duty.”
“It would, sir.”
“Tell me about Soric.”
“The chief is upset, sir.”
“Upset?”
“He is suffering from headaches.”
“And?”
Milo shook his head. “And nothing. Headaches.”
Milo stiffened as Hark produced a scrumpled piece of blue paper from his
storm-coat pocket and opened it out, holding it so that Milo could see.
It read: Guheen’s going to get himself pulped if he goes that way. The tank
is behind the cabinet maker’s shop.
“I have no idea what that means, sir,” said Milo.
“Soric is warp-touched, isn’t he?”
“Not that I know, sir.”
“If I find out he is, and that you’ve been covering for him, I’ll have your
neck as well as his. Clear, trooper?”
“Crystal, sir.”
“Get to your billet!” snapped Hark.
Milo hurried away and Hark turned and stared up at the massive window
lights that ran along the promenade bay. Up in the deep blue, stars were
shining.
Some of the stars were ships.
On the wide bridge of the frigate Navarre, Executive Officer Kreff leaned
forward in his padded seat and said, “Authorise.”
The bridge crew nodded, touching console switches. There was a low hum
as the gravitic assemblies in the massive ship’s underbelly cycled and flatbanded
mag waves to compensate for the ship’s orbital drift.
A proximity horn started to wail.
Kreff tutted and got up, sauntering over to the main pilot well where the
helm servitors sat in recessed floor sockets. The demi-human crew sat
hunched forward, their plug-crusted skulls looping hoses behind them like
braids.
“Station keeping,” he ordered.
“Maximal one oh one,” the nearest servitor croaked from its augmetic
voice-box.
With a press of his hand on the imprint reader, Kreff cancelled the siren.
Orbital space above Herodor was thick with ships, most of them informally
registered pilgrim tubs. Every few minutes, as the elegant frigate reclined in
orbit, tracking sensors would fire off, warning of another near miss. It had
become routine.
Kreff walked into the actuality sphere in the centre of the bridge space,
and looked around at the speckle of glowing ship-phantoms that appeared in
3D in the light-impressed sphere around him.
Tactical readouts glowed beside the various images, blinking as the
images slowly tracked. There was a mass conveyance called the Troubadour,
part of a newly arrived pilgrim caravan, that kept wandering into the
Navarre’s collision cone.
The vox beeped. It was the captain.
“Alarms woke me, Kreff.”
“Nothing to worry about, captain. Just routine.”
Captain Wysmark signed off.
“Bloody hulk is wandering again…” Kreff said.
“Troubadour is signaling, sir,” said one of the deck officers. “They have a
fire on board. Major fire, in the hold space. Requesting urgent assist.”
“Check it.”
“Navarre is reading massive heat build in the hold section. They’re
burning alive.”
Kreff nodded. “Fire suppression teams to standby. Board teams to ready.
Move us in, helm, and tell the Troubadour to stand by for immediate docking.
Let’s hustle.”
“Should I have the troops stand by, sir?” asked Colonel Zebbs, the ship’s
senior armsman, standing to attention behind Kreff.
“It’s a bloody pilgrim ship, not a hostile,” said Kreff.
Ensign Valdeemer took the data-slate from the waiting deck servitor,
reviewed it quickly, and then began to stride purposefully across the steel
deck of the Omnia Vincit towards the fleet captain’s pulpit To his left, where
the edge of the bridge deck dropped away, the dozens of helm servitors, techpriests
and astropath navigators were arranged in descending tiers, like the
upper circle of a great theatre. It took a massive crew to control a battleship
the size of the Omnia Vincit, a massive bridge crew alone The bridge space
was vast and vaulted like a gigantic basilica, its high domed roof painted
with beautiful frescos of the actes sanctorum.
Valdeemer was just a small part of that crew, and a recent part too. He’d
joined the ship just eighteen months before, but already he was a junior deck
officer. He knew he had a bright future. One day, it would be him sitting up
there in that magnificent throne, bio-linked to the ship’s systems, commanding
the power of a god in the Emperor’s name.
To get there, he had to shine. To excel. To do his job in exemplary fashion
and be seen to be doing it too. He could have voxed the report for the fleet
captain’s attention, but it was important, and suited personal delivery.
Besides, it brought him to the fleet captain’s attention.
He hurried up the alabaster steps of the pulpit pausing briefly at the top as
the Navy armsmen guards scanned him and then stood aside.
Fleet Captain Esquine terrified every member of the great ship’s crew.
Even Valdeemer, for all his confidence, was cowed by him. It was hard to
tell where the fleet captain’s gilded throne ended and his own body began.
He was encased in golden armour, intricately wrought and etched, and his
armour engaged directly with the throne so he formed a solid, engraved
structure. His hands and arms were fused into the arms of the seat, and the
back of his head, in its skullcap of gold, was locked against the throne’s high
back.
Esquine’s hands were set palm-down on the arms of the throne, and only
his gold-jacketed fingers moved, dancing like a pianist’s. At their bidding,
multi-jointed servo arms raised and lowered in front of the fleet captain’s
eyes, presenting pict-plates, larger actuality screens, and data-slates. The
fleet captain held them up, sometimes four or more at a time, overlaying,
comparing, transferring data from one to another with a blink, interlocking
and compressing information into tight holographic spheres that floated
around the throne.
Esquine’s face was long-browed and noble. His blade of a nose had a
slight hook to it, and his pale eyes were lashed with nearly invisible white
hairs. The gold tracery of circuitry was woven into his ears, his cheekbones
and the skin of his forehead from the edges of the skullcap, giving his flesh a
jaundiced tinge. His mouth was invisible behind the grille of a vox-caster
that rose from his gilded chest plate like a breathing mask.
Valdeemer smoothed the crisp front of his uniform jacket, shook out his
braided cuffs, adjusted the sit of his emerald sash, and stood to attention.
“You have a report for me, ensign?” Esquine asked. His voice was soft
and fluid, each word sounding like a rounded stone dropped into a deep
pool.
“Sir,” Valdeemer nodded, and held out the data-slate. Esquine’s fingers
flickered, and a servo arm extended out from the throne’s side and took the
slate, swinging it back before the fleet captain’s eyes.
“From the astropathicae,” Valdeemer went on. “They have detected an
advance perturbation in the Empyrean, warp modulus eleven two nine nine
seven, at a point—”
“Nine AU out from Herodor. I can read, ensign. A standard Imperial
arrival vector.”
“I thought I should bring it to you at once, sir.”
Locked in place, Esquine’s head could not turn, but his pallid eyes glanced
sidelong at Valdeemer for a moment.
“Of course.” Esquine’s gaze returned to the slate, and a servo-arm moved
in to offer up another for comparison. “The reinforcement fleet is
approaching. That worm Lugo will be pleased, no doubt. Let us prepare.
Ensign, step onto the throne plate.”
Valdeemer blinked and looked down. He was standing on the outer
decking of the command pulpit. The throne itself was set on a raised disc of
polished plasteel in the centre. He quickly stepped up onto the edge of this
inner platform.
There was a slight vibration. The disc began to move, sliding backwards.
The adamantine bulkhead wall behind the throne parted with a hiss of
disengaging magnetic locks, and the entire throne platform — and Valdeemer
along with it — retracted through the opening space.
As the shadow of the bulkhead passed over him, Valdeemer felt the
retracting throne-platform begin to rotate too. It turned them through one
hundred and eighty degrees until Esquine’s throne was now facing into the
secret, armoured chamber behind his pulpit. The strategium.
The bulkhead shutters closed, sealing them in. Valdeemer felt a rush of
excitement. This was the first time he had been invited into the inner sanctum
of command.
The dim, heavily buttressed chamber was ovoid. Tech-priests and senior
deck officers stood or sat at console stations built into the walls between the
buttress stanchions, and seven more perched at high podium consoles facing
inwards around the actuality sphere that flickered and glowed in the centre of
the room. There was a constant background murmur of vox chatter, cursor
chimes and machine language.
Commander Velosade was in charge here. He snapped to attention as the
throne rotated in and called out, “Captain on the strategium.” Everyone made
formal salute.
“At ease and continue,” said Esquine. “Display the warp perturbation, if
you will.”
Velosade cracked his ringers, and a dimple of mauve light appeared in the
lower hemisphere of the actuality globe.
“Reduce scale and give me tactical,” said Esquine.
The actuality sphere flickered, dissolved and reformed, slightly wider and
sparer in detail. Valdeemer recognised immediately they were looking at a
3D verisim of the entire inner system. There, the bright fuzz of the local star,
there Herodor, and the other four inner planets, the bright band of the asteroid
belt. The mauve dimple lay outside this inner group, as far from Herodor as
Herodor was from its star.
“Overlay tactical!” Velosade ordered.
A geometric grid graphic flowed into the sphere, graphing its dimensions,
and the disposition of Esquine’s vessels — along with the myriad pilgrim
and merchant ships — appeared as slowly drifting, numbered light-points.
“Astropathicae report parameters verified. Perturbation reads at warp
modulus eleven two nine nine seven, nine AU out. Tracking cogents.
Concordance estimated at ninety-three minutes. Awaiting confirmation.”
Velosade turned and looked at the fleet captain. “Orders, sir?”
“Remain as they were, commander. Warmaster Macaroth has charged us to
exercise extreme caution. Move a frigate up in front of the modulus point,
fighter screens up. They can greet arriving friends… or deny arriving
enemies. The remainder of the fleet stays as vanguard.”
A flutter of Esquine’s fingers made cursor points appear on the glowing
sphere. Valdeemer knew the commander was using the word “fleet”
ironically. An officer of Esquine’s rank — and a ship like the Omnia Vincit
— could normally expect to have a considerable attendant fleet in support.
However, Esquine’s battleship, with only two frigates in attendance, had
been sent to carry Lord General Lugo to Herodor by the War-master as a
mark of special respect, and the recently arrived Tanith had brought only one
frigate and one heavy cruiser as escort vessels. Three frigates, a cruiser, a
ship of the line, and fleet tender vessels — not too shabby as far as a flotilla
detail went, but badly under strength in terms of fleet engagements.
“Inform the surface,” Esquine continued, “and alert the civilian traffic that
there is a manoeuvre, code magenta, and that we expect their cooperation and
their careful station-keeping for its duration.”
Velosade nodded, and started growling orders. All the strategium crew
began working, many of them suddenly speaking loudly and urgently into
their vox-links.
“Your choice of frigate, sir?” called Velosade.
“The Navarre,” replied Esquine without hesitation.
“The Navarre is occupied, sir,” Veldeemer said suddenly and winced at
the sharp look the commander gave him for speaking out of turn.
“Let him talk, Velosade,” said the fleet captain. “Occupied how, ensign?”
“A mercantile mass conveyance in difficulties, sir. The Navarre signaled it
was moving to assist.”
“Let them carry on,” said the fleet captain. “Charge the Berengaria
instead.”
“Sir,” affirmed Velosade.
“Well appreciated, ensign,” said the fleet captain softly to Valdeemer. “A
slight diversion I hadn’t accounted. You read sphere tactics well.”
“I like to stay on top of things, sir.”
“Keep it up,” said Esquine.
Valdeemer felt a flush of pride run through him.
Its vast engines cycling up to one tenth power, the frigate Berengaria moved
away from Herodor, prowling forward into the interplanetary gulf. Though
only classified as a light cruiser, it was massive by any standards of
measure: a long, fortified, angular vessel, its barbed hull dull green. Frigates
of the Berengaria’s pattern were fast and well-armed, the blade-edge of any
serious Navy group.
“We have broken orbit and are advancing to the advised modulus,”
Captain Sodak said quietly, standing in the actuality sphere of the
Berengaria’s bridge.
“Signal sent and noted by fleet command, sir,” an ensign replied.
“Flight decks?”
“Fighter screen reports ready aye.”
“So noted. Cycle up the launch ramps.”
“Aye, captain.”
Sodak looked at the warp dimple in the depths of the impressed-light
sphere in front of him. It was getting larger and darker.
“Order is launch.”
“Order is launch, aye!”
Tiny specks of light darted from the flanks of the Berengaria. The specks
raced ahead of the massive warship, catching the backscattered light of the
distant sun as they fanned out into a cloud like dust-flies at twilight.
They were Lightning-pattern fighters, swift and deadly one-man craft, spat
out of the frigate’s launch decks by mag-catapult. In wide formation, they
spread out before their mighty parent craft.
Squadron Leader Shumlen, a thrice-decorated ace and flight commander of
the Berengaria’s fighter wing, dropped his heads-up scope into place and
gunned his Lightning forward into the apex point of the fighter screen.
Despite the physical rush of launch and the metabolic rush of the prospect of
combat, Shumlen’s vitals-reader showed that his cardiac rate was
astonishingly level and calm.
“Keep it spread,” he said unhurriedly over his vox-comm.
“Concordance in forty-two minutes and counting,” vox-link from the
frigate reported.
The Navarre shivered as its docking clamps secured the mass conveyance
Troubadour. On the frigate’s bridge, alert sirens rang and hazard lights
flashed.
Kreff cancelled them with a wave of his wand. He took the vox-horn from
a waiting servitor.
“Open the hatches. Boarding parties to ready. Transfer the wounded out.
Medical, stand by to receive injured.”
“Sir?”
“What is it?” Kreff snapped impatiently.
“That heat source sir, on the Troubadour…” The aide looked confused.
“It’s gone.”
“Gone?”
“Faded, sir. I guess they could have got the fire under control…”
Kreff looked at Zebbs.
“Go!” he said, and the soldier was running to the bridge exit.
“Shall I alert the captain?” asked the aide.
“No!” Kreff halted.
“Yes, yes. Wake him.”
A detail of Navy armsmen was waiting for Zebbs in the prep-chamber of the
mid-starboard air-gate. The colonel was pulling on his armour-jacket as he
entered. The detail stood to attention, bulky in their emerald green armour
suits, their combat shotcannons held ready, their faces hidden behind tinted
visors.
“Safeties, but let’s go careful!” he said, taking his own shotgun from his
number two.
He racked the grip of his powerful weapon and stepped to the gate.
“Open up mid-two!” he shouted.
The hatch ground open. There was no one on the other side. No sirens, no
alarms, no smell of fire or scenes of panic.
Zebbs stepped through. His armsmen hurried in after him, spreading out.
The hallway was dark, and it smelled of stale air as if the scrubbers were
malfunctioning. Zebbs wasn’t surprised. This was an old ship, poorly
maintained. It was a wonder it had ever made a warp-transition.
“Floor’s wet, sir,” popped one of his men over the inert vox.
“Coolant leak,” said another, his voice punctuated by the crackle of the
link.
“You think?” said Zebbs, looking down. The deck was awash, about two
centimetres deep in dark liquid. It looked for all the world like-There was a
little splash as something landed in the liquid and rolled towards them. It
ended up between Zebbs and his point man. They both looked down at it.
It was a grenade.
“Shit,” was all Zebbs had time to say.
“Zebbs? Zebbs? Colonel, report!” Kreff yelled into the vox horn. He’d just
heard a loud and suddenly cut-off roar over the channel that had wiped
signals out. Now there was only a dull murmur of static.
“Clean it up!” Kreff shouted at his aides. “I want Zebbs on the link now!”
They rushed to obey. A second later, from a different vox source, they
tuned in the sounds of shouting. Confused, demented shouting. And the smack
of gunfire.
Kreff lowered the vox-horn in dismay.
“Sever the dock-clamps! Break us off!”
“Clamps are locked out, sir!”
“What? What?”
“Docking clamps one through nine are locked out, sir,” said his aide.
“Holy Throne, no!”
“Is there a problem, Kreff?”
Kreff turned to see Captain Wysmark striding towards him across the
bridge.
“We’ve… we’ve been boarded, sir,” he said.
Wysmark, tall and saturnine in his green dress uniform, seemed
unflustered. He took the vox-horn from Kreff’s trembling hands and spoke
into it.
“Armsmen to all active airgates. On the double. Repel boarders. Repeat,
repel boarders.”
Space buckled. Space shimmered, and tore. Out of the splitting dark fabric,
the inscrutable light of warp space flashed and seared.
Out of the breach, ships thundered into view.
They came fast at first, as if flung out of the Chaotic reality, and then slid
down to a more dignified drift. Imperial ships. Three Munitorum
conveyances, then a Navy frigate, then four more heavy transporters.
“Open formation,” Shumlen ordered. “They’re friendlies. Repeat, they are
friendlies.”
The fighter screen broke around him, spreading wide and zipping like tiny
silver reef fish along the lengths of the ponderous new arrivals. The voxchannels
were suddenly busy with hailing signals.
“Request permission to return to carrier decks,” Shumlen voxed.
“The frigate Glory of Cadia sends greetings and compliments,” Sodak’s
ensign reported.
“Respond as per form, ensign.”
“The perturbation is not dissipating, captain,” called a tech-priest.
Sodak would have been surprised if it had. According to the watch
briefing, they were expecting something in the order of sixteen ships, and the
actuality sphere showed only eight newcomer vessels. A fleet disposition
emerging from warp space often came through in several waves.
“Instruct the Glory of Cadia to escort its charges into Herodor high anchor.
Inform fleet command that we will remain on station to await the next wave.”
“Yes sir.”
“Fighter screen, captain?” asked the flight controller from his raised,
glasteel-bubbled console station.
“Keep them aloft,” replied Sodak. He was a cautious man. Without that
caution, he’d never have lived long enough to become a warship’s
commander.
A crew-servitor, short and broad with circuitry glinting across its black
metalwork, turned from its station and handed Valdeemer a data-slate. The
ensign immediately hurried it across to the fleet captain’s throne. Esquine
was watching the fleet arrivals at the concordance point.
“Distress report, sir,” said Valdeemer anxiously. “The Navarre.”
“Show me,” said Esquine softly.
“They are under internal attack,” said Valdeemer, handing the slate to one
of the fleet captain’s grasping servo limbs. “Captain Wysmark reports
intruder hostiles attempting to board from the merchant ship.”
“Signal Wysmark. Ask him if he requires assistance.”
Hard rounds whined down the companionway and rattled off the metal
partitioning, causing the armsmen in Sublieutenant Epsin’s team to duck for
cover. Something was wrong with the deck lights. Only the frosty green
auxilary lighting panels were illuminated and, from the smell of the air, the
circulators were out or dying too.
There was a buzzing noise too, very faint, that came and went. Cabling
fritzing out, Epsin thought.
Another volley of shots. Epsin saw the deformed slugs bounce onto the
deck plating and roll. They looked like the crushed butts of lho-sticks.
It was sweep-fire. Random auto-bursts fired around corners and down
blind halls to clear a path.
“Hold fire,” Epsin whispered. “Let ’em think the way’s clean…”
Hunched down along the companionway behind bulkhead stanchions, his
men shifted uneasily, their shotcannons raised ready.
The enemy appeared. Three… then four, five… man-shadows hefting
short-pattern autoguns, hurrying down the hallway ahead.
“Repel,” Epsin whispered.
His cannon boomed, barking out a bright white flash in the dim green light.
Other shotcannons around him did the same. The shadows ahead collapsed,
hurled back violently by the heavy firepower. Acrid smoke filled the air and,
without the circulators in operation, stayed there.
“Forward!” Epsin ordered. The armsmen party hurried ahead, hugging the
metal walls of the companionway. Almost immediately, more hostiles
appeared around the junction turn ahead, rattling auto-fire in their direction.
Epsin’s pointman let out a cry and slumped sideways against the wall. The
man behind him recoiled, bent double and collapsed on his face.
“Bastards!” Epsin yelled. “For the Emperor! For the Navarre!” The
shotcannon bucked in his hands as he blasted with it. His team had almost
fought its way to the intersection leading down to the nearest airgate.
It was just then, above the roaring gunfire, Epsin heard the buzzing again.
“The fleet captain enquires if we require assistance, sir,” said Kreff.
Captain Wysmark looked up from the situations monitor at his exec. “What
do you think, Kreff?”
“I think we’re in for a hell of a dirty fight along the airgates, sir. But I
hardly think the fleet captain wants to lose another fifth of his flotilla to a
boarding action when we’re at magenta standby awaiting arrivals. We can
manage. The Navarre’s armsmen are the best in the fleet.”
Wysmark smiled slightly. “My reading exactly. Signal the Omnia Vincit so.
We’ll have this contained in another fifteen minutes.”
Kreff turned smartly and instructed the signals officer. He turned back to
his captain’s side.
“What was that?” Wysmark asked.
“Sir?”
“That buzzing. Did you not hear it, Kreff?”
“No sir.”
Wysmark shook his head and returned his attention to the monitor. “This is
the price we pay for wet-nursing the pilgrim craft.”
“Sir?”
“A mass of unregistered, unregulated traffic, filling orbit, packed with
citizens it’s our duty to protect. The odds were high there’d be infiltrators
and heretics amongst them. We’re obliged to help a ship in distress, even if it
turns out to be a trap. All part of the job, Kreff.”
“I was wondering, sir…”
“What?”
“Why now, sir? If there are heretics aboard the Troubadour, then they’ve
been here in orbit for three days. Why choose this moment to act?”
“I was thinking that myself. Coincidence that we’re at magenta standby and
thus stretched?”
“There’s no such think as coincidence, captain.”
Wysmark nodded. “Get me a verisim link to the fleet captain.”
“Incoming verisim!” Velosade called. “Captain Wysmark of the Navarre!”
“Display,” said Esquine.
A half-size holoform image of Wysmark appeared like a pale red phantom
in front of the fleet captain’s throne, projected up from the holo-emitters in
the strategium’s decking.
“Wysmark?”
“I wanted to advise extreme caution, fleet captain,” Wysmark’s voice
crackled over the vox-relay. “The boarding action we are enduring would
seem pointless unless it is part of a larger scheme.”
“The enemies of mankind are not famed for their tactical brilliance,” said
Esquine.
There was a slight time-lag delay before Wysmark’s image nodded and
smiled at the fleet captain’s remark. “Agreed, sir. But I fear this is a strategy
to take the Navarre out of useful disposition.”
“I see.”
“I simply wished to advise caution.”
“So noted. Thank you, Wysmark.”
The holoform faded. Esquine fixed Velosade with his hard, pale eyes.
“Wysmark is a sound commander not given to over reaction. Arm the main
batteries, captain.”
Epsin plunged through the thick smoke pluming down the air-gate’s entry
deck. The walls were marred with shot damage, and several bodies lay on
the deck. Rough, dirty men in drab red armour, their faces covered in black
iron masks.
More than simple heretics, Epsin thought.
He waved his men up. Along the side hallway that led to the other gate
entries, he heard sporadic gunfire.
And the buzzing again, that damn buzzing. Like an insect in a jar.
Epsin saw a figure in front of him, through the smoke. A tall figure…
No, three figures. One tall man, cloaked in pilgrim green and hooded,
clutching two smaller figures to his sides with thick, powerful arms that were
laced with tattoos. The smaller figures were dressed in rags, shivering and
dinging to the man in green like frightened children. They turned their faces
towards him, and Epsin gasped as he beheld their twisted, runtish, eyeless
visages.
In unison, they opened their mouths, and the buzzing grew much louder, as
if the lid had come off the jar and freed the insect. Epsin coughed and
staggered, shaking his head frantically to get rid of the buzz.
He knew what this was. He tried to adjust his headset to send a warning to
the captain.
The armsman beside him, a stalwart ship-trooper who had been in Epsin’s
team for nine years, turned slowly. His mouth was slack, and blood ran
copiously from his nose and tear-ducts.
He brought his shotcannon up and blew Epsin’s head off.
“Concordance now in two minutes,” the vox-link rasped.
“Thank you, Berengaria,” responded Shumlen, tilting slightly in the tight
embrace of his grav-seat as he brought the Lightning round in a tight turn.
“Flight leader to screen elements, form on me for a second pass. More traffic
inbound.”
The pilots of the squadron chattered back in confirmation and the Lightning
flight like a flock of racing birds, turned as one and made course towards the
calculated real-space entry point about seven hundred and fifty kilometres
ahead.
There was nothing to see The starfield at this speed was a striated blur,
and the warp perturbation that preceded a reentry was visible only on
instruments.
Shumlen checked his scope, and saw the swirling dimple of colour on the
low-res screen swell and flutter. “Arm weapons,” he said.
His pulse was barely idling.
For the second time in less than an hour, space tore open. The reality fissure
leapt and crackled like a luminous cephalopod, lashing tendrils of warp
energy into real space that twisted out, fizzled and faded. Non-baryonic light
flared brilliantly through the tear, backlighting the arriving ships.
Monumental silhouettes, they were shot forward into real space.
They did not slow down. They were moving at cruise speed. Attack speed.
Shumlen blinked. The arriving ships were just dots against the glare-spot
ahead of his squadron, but his pattern recognition systems began to hoot and
warble.
“Hostiles, hostiles, hostiles,” he said, matter-of-factly. “We have hostile
vessels in system and advancing. Flight leader to screen elements…
accelerate to attack velocity.”
“Hostiles reported!” the ensign sang out, a tremor in his voice.
“Battle stations,” said Sodak. The sirens began to wail. “Shields up. Arm
batteries. Power to main lances.”
“Shields aye!”
“Fighters are engaging,” said the flight controller.
Sodak gazed at the flickering images on the actuality sphere. “Increase
magnification. Get me a clearer picture.” At the current resolution, the
holographic display was overlaying tag cursors and disposition icons. Code
numbers were jumping and blinking.
“Tenfold mag aye!” said the ensign.
The tactical image enlarged rapidly. It looked like three enemy ships,
possibly four, but the overlay icon of the fighter screen was making it hard to
read the details.
“Take out the fighter icon,” snapped Sodak, and an aide cancelled the
overlay image of the Berengaria’s attack squadron.
Four ships. One of them very large. And they were moving. Point seven
five light at least, cutting straight towards Herodor.
“Enginarium,” said Sodak. “Flank speed, please. Reactor output to ninety
per cent. Last ready call for weapons.”
“Weapons aye. All green.”
“Firing solutions, all batteries and lances. Target the big one.”
“Aye sir.”
“Hostiles, sir,” said Velosade “Four marks. We believe three cruisers and a
capital ship.”
“Hold position.”
“Berengaria is engaging.”
“Hold position,” Esquine repeated.
“Signal from the Glory of Cadia, sir,” Valdeemer called out. “Requesting
permission to come about in support of the Berengaria.”
“Denied. I want them here, in line with us. Get that order confirmed.”
“Yes, fleet captain.”
“Status?” Esquine asked.
“Solstice is standing by. Laudate Divinitus is standing by. They both report
battle readiness.”
“The Navarre?”
“Still locked in the boarding fight, sir.”
Esquine fell silent. Around him, above the machine-code chatter of the
strategium, he could hear the ship’s priesthood chanting their blessings to
secure victory in combat. The Imperial creed was being broadcast over the
intercom system.
“Battle stations,” said Esquine softly. Bright red lamps began to cycle and
flash and a moaning alarm siren started to sound. Esquine felt a shiver run
through him as the neuro-plugs linking him to the ship’s systems delivered the
multiple responses of an Imperial battleship rising to full combat mode.
Esquine’s heart pounded as the reactors came to full power, his fingers
twitched as the weapon batteries made ready to fire, his flesh tingled as the
shields rose. He closed his eyes and experienced a rushing sense of
expanded vision as power was diverted from non-essential systems to boost
the main sensor cone. He looked, and saw the enemy bearing down.
The void was incandescent with rippling fireballs and traceries of light.
Shumlen gunned in under the rake of the enemy’s forward anti-ship batteries
and headed under the belly of the main vessel.
It was huge, easily the size of the Omnia Vincit, a Chaos battleship, its
black hull so covered with turret clusters and shield pods it looked diseased
and blistered. Three Chaos cruisers ran with it, fearsomely lithe warships
with serrated hulls. Two were decked in red and gold, the third black with its
ribbed superstructure painted white.
The Berengaria’s fighter screen had met the ships head on, so as to
minimise the angles of fire available to the enemy gunners, but even so
Shumlen had already lost about thirty ships to the massive anti-fighter
barrage. Every pilot knew the drill. Once they were on the enemy, it was
individual action. There was no hope of formation tactics in a fight zone this
confused.
Shumlen hugged the enemy hull as close as he dared. He loosed one
underwing missile, but was already well past by the time it detonated and he
was unable to tell what surface damage he might have inflicted.
A Lightning tumbled past in front of him, causing him to veer as his
collision warning system blared briefly. The Lightning was coming apart,
shredding as it fell like a comet towards the hulking surface of the
battleship’s hull.
Pulse lasers chased Shumlen, stitching the darkness with phosphorescent
bolts. He banked hard left, saw a raised missile turret ahead, and fired his
second missile. The blast dazzled him and his whole ship shook violently as
he flew out of the blastwash.
A Lightning slid close to him, almost in formation, and then exploded as
pulse fire from the hull found it. Another two shot over the top of him and
began strafing runs along the underhull. Shumlen lost sight of them in the
vivid firestorm.
Shumlen half-heard a transmission on the vox.
“Repeat, repeat,” he said. His pulse was just beginning to lift.
“Bats, bats, bats!” one of his wingmen repeated.
The enemy had got its fighter screen launched.
Flickering with twinkling flashes of light from the small-ship fight racing
around their hulls, the Chaos vessels bore on.
“Archive sweep results, captain,” said Persson, Sodak’s tactical officer.
Sodak looked over the data. Two of the enemy cruisers were positively
identified: the Cicatrice, with its white-ribbed superstructure, and the
Revenant, its red hull laced with gold. The third cruiser was either the
Harm’s Way or the Suture. The identity of the main battleship was vague, for
such giants were much more seldom seen, but Persson’s pattern recognition
program suggested the monster was the Incarnadine, an ancient, infamous
craft.
“Master of ordnance? Have we firing solutions?”
“Solutions and range, captain,” replied Adept Yarden.
“Fire!” snarled Sodak.
The deck rocked beneath him slightly. Streaks of light from the lances and
main batteries spat into the darkness.
“Main batteries have fired. Lances have fired. Torpedoes are running.”
On the augur-scope, blips of light crackled around the dark bulk of the
approaching Incarnadine.
“Damage?”
“Their shields have held, captain,” said the master of ordnance.
“Second cycle, fire!”
Berengaria trembled again.
“Third cycle, fire!”
“Torpedoes have reached target, captain.”
“Damage… give me something, Yarden!”
The master of ordnance glanced over at the captain from his position at the
fire control station.
“I’m sorry, sir. Nothing.”
“The Revenant is breaking formation, captain!”
Sodak turned his attention to the actuality sphere. One of the enemy
cruisers was accelerating away from the battle group and advancing ahead of
it.
“Engaging us?” asked an ensign.
“No,” said Sodak. “They’re going for the convoy.” The Revenant’s course
was vectoring it in after the slow moving Munitorum ships that had come out
of the warp.
“Maintain course. All forward batteries and lances to sustain firing cycles
at the primary target Torpedoes too, if you please. As the Revenant passes us
and presents, I want sustained fire on it from the flank batteries.”
“Aye, captain,” replied Yarden, swiftly moving to task his gunnery officers
and their servitor crews.
The Revenant, swooping in like an interstellar predator, seemed to finetune
its path as it passed the Berengaria as if to taunt Sodak. Its main
weapons blasting forward, the Berengaria lit up its port side with fierce fire
from its flank batteries. The Revenant made a desultory return of fire from its
own side armaments as it thundered past.
“We hit them sir. Minor hull damage. Not enough to slow them.”
“Us?”
“Shields held.”
“Signal the fleet captain and verify his instructions. Does he want us to
maintain assault?”
The bridge suddenly lurched hard, and damage klaxons beeped wildly.
“The Incarnadine has begun firing on us, sir. Minor shield damage.”
The ensign had barely finished when the ship shook again. Several
crewmen were thrown off their feet, and the wail of the klaxons got louder.
Sodak could see from the main console that they’d been hit hard on the upper
hull. Moderate damage, hull punctures, interdeck fires…
“Auxiliary power to the shields!” he cried.
The Berengaria yawed as it was struck again. And again.
At the high anchor point above Herodor, the Glory of Cadia rumbled in well
ahead of the reinforcement convoy it had been escorting. As per Esquine’s
firm orders, it came about in a wide arc and took up station in battle
formation with the massive Omnia Vincit and its smaller sisters the Solstice
and the heavy cruiser Laudate Divinitus. Behind and below them, the mass of
pilgrim ships formed a wide scatter of small, vulnerable targets, huddled
close to the upper atmospheric reaches of the cold planet. Despite Esquine’s
command edicts, some of this motley host had begun to break orbit and flee, a
few directly out into interplanetary space, chasing off towards Herodor’s star
and the further reaches of the system. Others were moving to geo-sync orbits
behind Herodor, hoping to keep the planet between them and the terrifying
attackers.
At a twitch of Esquine’s fingers, an aft lance battery on the mighty Omnia
Vincit fired, and crippled the merchantman Somnambulist as it attempted to
break anchor.
That was all the time and firepower the fleet captain intended to waste.
“Signal the civilian fleet again, Velosade. We will punish any further
infringement of the edict in a similar fashion. I will not have non-military
vessels confusing the issue with unauthorised movement. Tell them any such
action will force us to suspect they harbour heretic agents and that we will
fire on them accordingly.”
“Sir!”
“The Berengaria’s in trouble, sir,” whispered Valdeemer.
“I see that plainly, ensign. We will hold position. If we move to assist
them, we will lose our formation initiative. Sodak knows when to fight and
when to break and run.”
Valdeemer frowned. He knew Sodak’s orders had been an unequivocal
instruction to engage. There had been no discretionary option for flight.
“Should I inform him of such, sir?” asked Valdeemer.
“No,” said the fleet captain.
He had fire on nine decks, a reactor crippled and shields close to failure.
There was no longer enough power for the lances. “Torpedoes!” Sodak
ordered.
“Torpedoes aye!” cried Yarden.
“Cancel some of these damn alarms,” Sodak added. The air was ringing
with overlapping klaxons. He could smell acrid smoke. Smoke gathering in
the circulator system, too thick and dense to be expunged by the air
scrubbers.
The massive enemy warship was right on them now, so close Sodak could
actually see it as a dot through the glasteel windows of the bridge.
“Keep us true! Keep us face on!” he shouted at the helm officers. The
frigate’s strongest hull armour was concentrated around the prow. He didn’t
want to expose the flanks. Moreover, he wanted to maintain as small a target
as possible.
“Aye, sir!”
“We’re yawing, helm!”
“Attitude control is damaged, captain. We’re trying to compensate…”
The Incarnadine fired on them again. Sodak didn’t have time to even
register the salvo on the augur scope.
The Berengaria pitched wildly. Parts of the upper hull splintered away in a
spray of micro-fragments. Power failed for a few seconds on the bridge as an
explosion tore across the forward helm position, incinerating three helm
officers, five servitors and Tactical Officer Persson.
Yarden was still at his post, blood gushing from a shrapnel wound in his
chest. Blood bubbled at his lips as he tried to call out a situation report, his
dripping hands fumbling with the fire control console.
Sodak knew the situation, even though Yarden couldn’t report, even though
the actuality sphere had failed and the augur-scopes were dead. They were
mortally wounded and helm-less, drifting now under the momentum of impact
to present their starboard side to the archenemy monsters.
“Signal the Omnia Vincit,” Sodak cried. “Signal begins… The Emperor
protects—”
A salvo of torpedoes from the Harm’s Way hit the Berengaria amidships,
followed a scant moment later by a lance strike from the Incarnadine. The
Berengaria seemed to blink and twitch for a second as plasma fire coiled and
rippled like lava along its broken flank.
And then it vaporised in a Shockwave of expanding white light.
In the Omnia Vincit’s strategium, Valdeemer almost didn’t notice the death
flare of the Berengaria. He was staring at the actuality sphere with horrid
fascination as the enemy frigate the Revenant powered in after the desperate
relief convoy. The indicator icons of two mass transports flickered and died.
The others tried to break and evade, but the archenemy killer was directly
astern.
“Commence formation advance,” Esquine called. “Battle engagement
pattern. Signal Wysmark and tell him to stop wasting time. We need the
Navarre now.”
In a wide, firm line, the four Imperial warships prowled forward from
high anchor, shields raised, to meet and deny the enemy assault.
SEVEN
PLANET FALL
“Nine are coming.”
—message written in Soric’s hand
Gaunt had arrived half asleep at the hastily called meeting just before dawn.
After the night’s curious events, he’d tried to nap for a few hours, only to be
woken by Beltayn in the middle of the afternoon.
“The lord general wants to see you, sir,” Beltayn said.
Lugo and his house staff had occupied a mansion on the ninety-seventh
level of Old Hive. It was a place of faded grandeur. The walls and high
ceilings were cased in shiny black ebonite inlaid with matt detailing in
arthrocite, and the floor was paved with pink, earth-fired tiles throughout. On
every fourth wall panel in the entry hall, an electrolamp was set in a brass
wall sconce, and long webs of glinting steel-lace hung as drapes at each
arched doorway.
It wasn’t made clear to Gaunt whose palace-home this was, or where they
had gone to make way for Lugo.
To be honest, he wasn’t thinking much of that. He was bleary headed as the
postern sentries let him in and showed him the way down two long hallways
and up a flight of brick steps to the room where Lugo was waiting.
Gaunt had been expecting some kind of formal staff summit, and was
surprised to find Lugo alone except for Kaldenbach.
The room was cold — the whole mansion was cold — as if the ancient
heating pipes and hypercausts of the crumbling Old Hive were weak and
inefficient at this high level. Lugo sat in a suspensor chair, dressed in a thick
houserobe over his uniform shirt and breeches. His jacket and cap lay on a
tall wooden dressing stand beside him.
He was sipping caffeine from a porcelain cup. A portable thermal heater
was standing on the floor, warming his booted feet.
The room had tall, lancet windows of touched, coloured glass in two
walls, and a set of ornate glass doors in the third that appeared, through the
veil of a steel-lace drape, to give access out onto some kind of balcony or
roof terrace. Kaldenbach stood beside these doors, arms folded, looking
either stubborn or threatening. Gaunt wasn’t quite sure what the man was
shooting for. Threatening, he guessed.
“Sir.”
“Come in, Gaunt. A hot drink?”
“Thank you, no, sir.”
Kaldenbach, who had started to move at Lugo’s offer, continued anyway
even when it was refused, and helped himself to a cup from a silver vacuumjug
that stood on a dresser against the wall.
“I apologise for the early call,” Lugo said, almost cordially. “I wish to
speak with you about the Beati.”
“About the Beati…”
“About what we should do.”
“In what respect, sir?”
Lugo cleared his throat delicately and took another sip. “I have so far
made myself and my resources available to the Beati. To, shall I say, the
whim of the Beati. Her sanctified mind perceives the cosmos in a way ours
do not, so I trust her judgment, even if it might seem… wayward.”
Gaunt smiled slightly.
“At her urgings, we decamped here to this… place of insignificance. I
suggested that her person might be of greater use alongside the Warmaster at
the front, but no. She was very polite, as you might expect, but she refused the
idea. Herodor was what she insisted on, and to Herodor I escorted her.”
“We have spoken of this before, sir,” said Gaunt. “You hoped to enlist my
aid in convincing her to change her mind. Indeed, you applied pressure on my
commissar to get me to do just that.”
Lugo shrugged as if this was trifling. “We are past such shadow play now,
Gaunt. The Bead must go to Morlond. She must quit this place and go directly
to Morlond. I’m not asking for your help. I’m ordering that you give it.”
“I see,” said Gaunt.
“Come, come,” said Lugo, smiling. “We’re all friends here, Ibram. Tell me
your thoughts.”
“You want to know what I think?” Gaunt asked.
“The lord general was quite clear,” said Kaldenbach sharply.
Gaunt glanced at him, and Kaldenbach looked down. “Very well,” said
Gaunt. “I think you knew the truth all along. From the moment on Hagia when
Sanian first became known to you. You were completely aware that she was
a fake… a troubled, delusional girl who believed she was the incarnation of
Sabbat and played the part reasonably well. You saw the currency in this,
and backed her claim, for the good of Imperial morale… and to advance your
own interests.”
“You insult the lord general with such slander—” Kaldenbach started.
Lugo held up a hand smartly.
“Allow Gaunt to talk or leave the room, colonel.”
“I’m sorry if I’m too honest, sir,” said Gaunt. “You did say the time for
shadow play was over.”
Lugo nodded, and gestured for Gaunt to continue.
“You saw the best way to control her was to let her have her way for a
while Let her make decisions, grow into the role with confidence A
pilgrimage here… well, that sounds like the sort of inexplicable but lofty
thing a reincarnated saint would do. To cleanse herself before the coming
war. You’d indulge her for a few months, working on her all the while, and
then make the journey to the front seem like her own idea. You’d join the
Warmaster, no doubt inspiring his forces to a conclusive victory, and your
eminence would be assured. What were you hoping for? A sector
governorship? Host command? Higher than that?”
Lugo retained his smile, but there was a glaze of bitter ice in it. Gaunt
knew he had hit the mark.
“And everything was going so well… apart from a few unpredicted
inconveniences like the fact she requested the Tanith as bodyguards. That
must have rankled, having me arrive and get in the way. But nothing you
couldn’t handle. Your plan was still intact. Until last night.”
“Last night?” echoed Lugo.
“Last night, lord general. When your little pawn did something you weren’t
expecting. When Sanian — and don’t ask me to explain this, for it defies
rational explanation — when Sanian became the real thing after all. She is
the Beati, she is truly everything she believed herself to be, everything you
pretended she was. A miraculous being in the strictest sense of the term. And
that changed things. You have no idea what to do. You can’t manipulate her
any more. She is suddenly beyond your powers of reason and control, beyond
your basic understanding. You’re afraid. You’re out of your depth. And your
plan is coming apart at the seams.”
Lugo sucked his teeth thoughtfully, then got to his feet, shed his houserobe
and started to put on his dress jacket. Kaldenbach started forward like a valet
to hold the garment for him.
“A gripping piece of speculation, Ibram,” said the lord general, “and quite
convincing in its own way. Thank you for being so open.”
He turned to Gaunt, buttoning up the jacket’s frogging. “Utterly specious,
of course. I have known the Saint to be genuine from the very start, and have
supported her in that light. Nothing has changed. She has always been a
miraculous figure to me. I bless the God-Emperor of mankind for placing me
in this role of trust.”
“Just so,” said Kaldenbach.
“Just so indeed,” said Gaunt with a light shrug. “As I said before, it
doesn’t matter what I think anyway. The important thing is that you realise I
agree with you. Fake or real, the Beati should be with the Warmaster on
Morlond. For the good of the Imperium, the Sabbat Worlds, the entire
Crusade. I’m not going to fight you over that. I’ll do everything I can to help
persuade her. I don’t of course, know if I have any influence over her at all.
But I will try.”
Lugo put on his cap, looked Gaunt in the eyes, and then stretched out his
hand. Gaunt, surprised, shook it.
“Thank you, Ibram,” Lugo said. “I knew you were a team player.”
“One last thing you should know, sir,” Gaunt added as their hands parted.
“What?”
“I am pretty sure this event we are part of, this incarnation, this
manifestation… I’m pretty sure it is more significant than we realise. Space
and time and… fate, if you will… are all coming together, and synchronising.
Even before Sanian truly manifested as the Beati last night, the ripples of that
happening were spreading through this sector and beyond. Signs, portents,
auguries. You’ve heard them all, and put them down to hysteria amongst the
faithful, I’m sure. But they are more than that. Every psyker in the sector —
ours and theirs — must have felt as much. The cosmos is turning for a
purpose, lord general, and this is one of those rare occasions when we can
hear its machinery whirring and see its handiwork.”
“You speak like a prophet, Gaunt!”
“No prophet me… but still. I knew about Herodor long before I was
summoned here. I was told to expect the Saint. My troopers have told me
numberless stories from the pilgrim camps of men and women who share that
supernatural inkling. Not the fanatics, not the stylites and the flagellants and
the mystics who jump at any rumour. You’d be amazed how many normal,
regular people there are out there. People who have thrown their lives and
homes away to make the journey here because they simply, indelibly knew
something.”
“Are you trying to scare me, Gaunt?” Lugo said with a falsely hearty
chuckle.
“No, sir. But a healthy sense of fear would not be amiss. We stand in a
time of wonder, sir. There is no telling what it might bring, but it will be
momentous.”
Gaunt heard voices and footsteps in the hallway outside the room, but
ignored them. “Let us hope,” he said directly, “that we are witnessing the end
of the Crusade. Victory in the Sabbat Worlds, the archenemy put to fire and
flight. With the Beati at Morlond—”
“I will not go to Morlond,” said a voice from behind him.
Gaunt turned. Sabbat stood in the doorway of the chamber, one hand raised
to hold back the steel-lace drapes. She was wearing simple, grey combat
fatigues and heavy black troop boots. Her skin was deathly pale and her eyes
showed signs of upset and reproach.
“Beati,” said Gaunt, bowing his head. Lugo and Kaldenbach did likewise.
“I will not go to Morlond,” she repeated, stepping into the room and letting
the steel-lace fall back into place. Through its patterned folds, Gaunt could
see the household troopers hovering outside, too scared to come in after her.
“There is work to be accomplished here,” she said. “Vital work. That is
my purpose. Morlond can wait, or be tamed without me.”
“Lady, we—” Gaunt began.
Sabbat placed a hand gently on his arm and he fell silent, unable to speak.
“Herodor is the key, Ibram. The warp has shown this. I will not leave until
this work is done.”
“How…” Lugo began. “How can we serve you, lady?”
“I was looking for Ibram. It’s time They’re coming, and I am afraid. I was
looking for my protector. My honour guard.”
“The Tanith?” Gaunt whispered.
“You and the Tanith. I need you now.”
“What do you mean, ‘it’s time’?” Gaunt asked.
She took him by the hand and led him over to the glass doors, which she
opened with a press of her fingers. They went through, out onto the roof
terrace. Lugo and Kaldenbach followed.
The terrace was a semi-circle of rockcrete jutting like a shelf from the
steep roof levels of the Old Hive spire. A glasteel dome shielded them from
the arctic atmosphere. The great sprawl of the Civitas Beati spread out
below them, far below, a brown maze of angular shadows. The massive
shape of the second hive tower rose up nearby, almost to their level, a slabby
silhouette against the just rising sun.
Around the edge of the terrace were terracotta planters. The roses and
sambluscus planted in them had withered and died into gnarled twigs,
untended, but they reminded Gaunt of Lord Chass’ roof garden in the upper
Spine of Vervunhive.
Gaunt felt a twinge of fear and melancholy. But for a metal flower from
that garden, he would have died on Verghast.
There were no flowers here.
Sabbat pointed up at the sky. It was thin blue, creased by bars of lustrous
yellow and furrows of cloud in the east. The last stars were still visible.
“They are coming,” she said again. “They are here. That’s why I will not
go to Morlond. I can’t go anywhere now.”
Gaunt stared up at the part of the sky her slender fingers had indicated.
“What do you—”
A flash. For a moment. A little spark high up among the stars. Then
another, like impossible lightning, up in space.
“What does she mean?” Lugo hissed to Gaunt, shivering in the unheated air
of the high garden.
“Ship to ship fire. The fleet has engaged. A planetary assault has begun.”
“Surely not,” said Kaldenbach. “We would have heard…”
“It’s only just started,” said Gaunt. “Circulate orders, sir. Prepare for
ground assault.”
“Oh, premature!” Kaldenbach scoffed. “Fleet Captain Esquine has our
interests protected. Four ships of the line… the Omnia Vincit alone could—”
Gaunt ignored him. “Lady?”
“They’re here, Ibram. Now I need you. You will protect me, won’t you?
You and your Ghosts? You will protect me until the work is done here?”
“You have my word, lady.”
A junior officer in the uniform of Lugo’s life company hurried onto the
terrace behind them, clutching a data-slate.
“Lord general! A signal from the fleet captain, sir. He’s engaged with an
incoming hostile battle group, sir and—”
Lugo took the slate from him abruptly. “I know already. Dismissed.” As
the junior backed off, bemused, Lugo read the slate data and handed it to
Kaldenbach.
“Four archenemy ships. Potent but Esquine should be able to hold them.”
“He won’t.” Her voice was soft, almost a whisper.
Gaunt looked straight at Lugo. “Prepare for ground assault,” he repeated
firmly.
Lugo held his gaze for several seconds. Gaunt could almost see his mind
working through possibilities, necessities and maybes. Lugo closed his eyes
and sighed deeply.
“Do as he says,” he told the life company colonel.
“Lord General, I—”
“Now!” barked Lugo, and Kaldenbach turned and ran.
Now that was interesting.
Shumlen’s vitals-reader had just shown his pulse rate spike the highest it
had been in seventeen years. One for the logbook, he thought.
He’d just pulled a turn so tight the G-force had all but crushed him and
blinded him for about fifteen seconds. He blinked hard to get his squeezed
eyeballs to refocus.
Where the hell was that bat?
He hit the thrusters and spun his bird down into a wide evade. Blitz fire
and enemy cannonades fluttered brightly in the darkness outside his canopy.
He saw a Lightning far to his left, two bats on its back. Twenty-seven? Was
that Liebholtz?
Las-fire chattered and pinked, studding the blackness, brilliant, then gone.
The Lightning dogged, banked and came around, but the bats were still on
him.
“Twenty-seven, twenty-seven, rake-turn to port,” Shumlen said over his
vox as he soared down through the AF fire. A bat he hadn’t even seen, wings
hooked, chin-cannon flashing, went by and over him, away. Damage alerts
beeped from his instrumentation and he cancelled them out.
His heads-up display swam and shifted, crosshairs drifting as he turned
again.
“They’re all over me! All over me!” Liebholtz’s voice squealed over the
link.
“Turn one-eight-one and come around hard,” Shumlen said.
His thumb trembled over the fire-stud in the top of his stick.
He was head on. He kicked the burners to full, crossing the Lightning
coming the other way. The nearest bat, right on its tail, slammed into his
display and the finders locked it up. The crosshairs went bright and hard and
started to flash. The lock-tone sounded, a rising shrill.
He depressed his thumb and fell into a roll. He felt the shudder of his
cannon pumping, the rhythmic grind of the autoloaders.
The bat flamed out in a bright fireball. Winnowing pieces of debris
clattered off his hull and canopy.
Liebholtz wasn’t clear yet. He was trying to climb out of the horizontal
vector.
Typical air-boy, Shumlen thought. Liebholtz was a great pilot, truly gifted,
but he’d come out of planetary airforce, like so many pilots. He still thought
in terms of up and down, right and left.
No such things. Any true void-fighter knew that. And Shumlen was a true
void-fighter. Oh yeah, this close to a planet or super-massive ships there was
a marginal grav-element to allow for, but that was just part of the game. To
void-fight, you had to think in three dimensions at once.
Shumlen flipped his bird up and over. Liebholtz was trying to cut up, but
the bat was sticking with him.
Shumlen’s heads-up hunted, washing left and right.
He saw the bat. A Locust-pattern interceptor, painted in tiger stripes. Long
nosed, twin-boomed, spiky. Its chin-gun was already spelling out Liebholtz’s
doom.
Liebholtz’s inarticulate last words spluttered out of the vox. His bird was
consumed in a bright yellow flare.
Shumlen had the bat. The killer. It jinked back and forth, but he kept it in
field. God-Emperor, but this jockey was good.
Shumlen tried a shot and missed.
He snatched his thumb off to conserve ammo. Thirty-seven per cent
munitions left. One missile. Twenty-two per cent fuel remaining.
The Locust rolled back and over, coming down facing the other way and
spiralling.
Neat… but not neat enough. Shumlen powered past him, and began to dive
down towards the vast hull landscape of the archenemy battleship as it slid
by, taunting the gun batteries.
They didn’t let him down. Neither did the bat.
The batteries started pounding the moment Shumlen went over them, but he
was too fast for them to make a kill.
They were still pounding when the bat chased after him, hungry for
Shumlen’s bird.
The bat went up in a messy spray of burning gases and hull debris.
Shumlen switched back up, got a lock almost immediately, and killed
another bat on the turn with a drumming salvo from his cannon.
A cannon shell from somewhere punched through his port wing and he
turned hard again, right into the backwash of an AF blitz.
Shumlen slunk away, circling in a deep, open turn. The bat zipped past him
and he locked it tight. His cannon shuddered.
It blew out like a flower, the fuselage peeling away into silver shreds. He
saw the pilot vaporise as he tried to eject.
A dismal toll rang from his instruments. He looked at his ammo counter
and saw the worst.
Count zero. And the fuel load wasn’t much better.
He flipped back. One missile left. Time to make it count.
Sweeping in and out of the bursting patterns of AF, he powered towards
the bow of the archenemy battleship. The forward launch decks, open like
mouths in the front snout of the beast. A missile there…
Bats passed in front of him, chasing Lightnings. More AF, incandescent.
Then a bat with a bird on its tail, spraying rounds.
The bow of the super-massive craft dropped away under him, and Shumlen
turned tightly, thrusters burning away the last dregs of his fuel as he came in
for the final run of his career.
“Signal from the Omnia Vincit, sir!” Kreff yelled. Captain Wysmark didn’t
seem to hear him. The captain was standing by the master console, adjusting
settings.
“Sir?”
That buzzing. Kreff could hear it. What the hell was it? It made his ears
ache.
“Sir!”
Wysmark glanced up at him. “Kreff?”
“Omnia Vincit is ordering us to join formation. The fleet captain says we
should seal internals and blow the Troubadour off us.”
“Does he, indeed?”
Wysmark’s hands danced over the master console.
“Sir?” said Kreff, alarmed. “We should issue an emergency brace warning
and clear the gates before we—”
There was an almighty thump. It shook the bridge of the Navarre so hard
that Kreff was thrown over. Wysmark remained on his feet.
In a blizzard cloud of fragments, the Navarre had blown locks and torn
away from the Troubadour. In the process, it had opened three of its skinlevel
decks to hard vacuum, but Wysmark had sealed the internal hatches and
prevented a total breach.
Even so, ninety-six armsmen, who had spent the last half hour fighting for
the very life of the Navarre, were locked out and voided to their deaths by
the drastic manoeuvre.
The Troubadour slumped away from the frigate, spilling material and
debris. It dropped away towards the glinting shoals of pilgrim ships in the
high atmosphere.
As its engines ignited, the Navarre came nose up, and turned away from
the bright planet below it.
Wysmark co-opted fire control to his console, and tasked the Navarre’s
batteries. When the actuality sphere gave him solution, he fired.
The Navarre blew the tumbling Troubadour into a billion glittering
fragments.
“Sir! We need to get into the fleet formation!” Kreff stammered, getting up.
He was astonished at the captain’s brutality. Crewmen had just died,
unnecessarily. Wysmark ignored him, but the Navarre was coming around
nevertheless.
Kreff joined his captain at the master console, reading the display.
Enginarium to full motive, shields up, weapons to power…
And a red light Kreff didn’t recognise.
Kreff flinched back as he realised it was a drop of blood on the console,
underlit by an enginarium rune.
Another drip fell next to it.
Blood was running out of the captain’s left tear duct.
The buzzing was back, so loud, so very loud—
“Captain?”
“Firing solution, please, exec.”
“Firing solution?” Kreff recoiled in dismay. The Solstice, the Navarre’s
sister ship, was rolling into view ahead, side on as it faced the incoming
enemy.
“Now, if you please, Kreff!”
“Sir, it’s one of ours!”
The knuckles crushed his nose and made him bite through his lip. Crying
out in pain and spitting blood, Kreff fell sideways.
“Captain!”
Buzzing, buzzing, buzzing…
The Navarre lurched as its main lances fired. The beams, on full load, cut
through the Solstice’s flank plating and opened its inner decks to space All
two thousand metres of it crumpled like metal foil and tore apart A moment
later, its reactors went up. Where the Solstice had been, only a white hot
blast radius remained.
The expanding Shockwave hit the Navarre bow-on. The ship bucked and
threw like an unbroken steed. Kreff hit the deck for a third time.
Prone, he looked up at Wysmark. He had been with the captain for ten
years, ten years of loyalty and love. Blood was dribbling from Wysmark’s
nose and eyes, and his expression was oddly slack.
He was no longer the officer Kreff had followed into the mouth of death
and back too many times to count.
Kreff fumbled with his uniform’s holster and pulled out his service pistol.
Wysmark, without looking, had already produced the compact auto-mag
anchored under the master console. He pointed it down at Kreff and fired, his
attention on the main screen all the while.
The first shot smashed Kreff’s pelvis. The second broke three ribs and
ruptured a lung. The third pulped Kreff’s right ear and spanked off the deck
plating.
Gasping in pain, sobbing in ragged breaths, Kreff lay on his back in a
widening pool of his own blood. He raised his service pistol in a shaking
hand and shot Wysmark in the side of the head.
Wysmark swayed. The impact of the round rocked him. The left side of his
skull burst outwards, and bloody tissue dripped onto his braided collar.
He fell over to his left, hard.
“Help me! Help me!” Kreff gasped. Ensigns and servitors ran over to him,
picking him up.
“Navarre to Omnia Vincit! Navarre to Omnia Vincit?” Kreff yelled into the
vox.
“The Solstice… is gone…” Valdeemer stammered.
“Gone? How?” Esquine demanded.
“The Navarre… it fired on her. Direct, sustained hit to midships.”
“Heretics have taken the Navarre. Emperor protect us!”
“What are your orders, sir?” Velosade asked.
“Cleanse my ship,” said Esquine. There were furious tears in his inlaid
eyes.
“Firing solutions! The Navarre,” Velosade bellowed.
The side batteries of the Omnia Vindt lit up and stayed lit. The Navarre’s
shields soaked up the merciless bombardment for several seconds, swirling
and coruscating like molten glass. Then they began to buckle and fail. The
Navarre heeled over, its hull shredding and burning. Its gravitic assemblies
shut down and it started to fall, stern-first, into the gravity well of the planet.
A vast internal explosion disintegrated it before it hit the atmosphere.
On the Navarre’s bridge, Executive Officer Kreff was still trying to raise
the Omnia Vindt on the fleet channel as he died.
The debris from the Navarre rained down towards the surface of Herodor,
becoming meteors in the upper atmosphere.
One of those meteors was a standard pattern escape pod. It rocked and
tumbled violently, rattling and vibrating as it plunged.
The two runt psykers were wailing in terror, flinching at every lurch. The
big man in green silk robes murmured soothing words of reassurance and
comfort to them as if they were his children, his massive tattooed arms
holding them tight.
“Almost there,” said Pater Sin. “Almost there…”
“You ready for this?” Mkvenner asked lightly.
Gol Kolea straightened the front of his fatigue jacket and nodded. Side by
side, they walked in through the entrance of the Tanith billet.
The dawn call had sounded some minutes before, and the troops were
rousing. Water pots were clattering onto stove rings, and men were dressing.
It was exactly the same as every morning in the Guard, simple routine.
Only the place — a scholam by the look of it, Kolea thought — was different.
It made him smile.
“Morning, Gol,” said Obel, wandering past. Kolea nodded. No one gave
him a second look. News hadn’t reached here yet.
He wandered down the rows of bunks, looking around, hungry for the sight
of familiar faces. There was a little ache in the back of his heart that some
faces wouldn’t be there. Muril… Piet Gutes… Try Again Bragg…
“This one’s yours,” said Mkvenner.
Kolea stopped, and sat down on an unmade bunk. His pack was there.
He looked up at Mkvenner. The lean Tanith gazed down at him and shook
his head. “A night I won’t forget. A favour I intend to repay.”
“No need, Ven.”
“You saved my life,” said Mkvenner. “You’re going to have to make it up
to me.”
Kolea smiled.
“I’ll see you later, Kolea,” said Mkvenner, and moved off through the
dorm.
Kolea sat for a moment as the bustle went on around him. Then he took off
his jacket and undervest and opened his pack to find a fresh shirt. The weight
of the plaster effigy in his jacket pocket made him remember it was there He
took it out, looked at it for a moment, and stuffed it down inside his pack for
safety.
He found a folded vest and shook it out to put it on.
“Know how to dress yourself, do you, gak-head?”
Kolea looked up. Cuu had been walking by, dressed in his undershorts,
fresh from the shower block. He had a towel over his shoulder. The painfully
white, unhealthy skin of his scrawny, corded torso was covered in crude
tattoos. He sneered at Kolea.
“Want me to help, gak-head? Want me to help you dress, you pathetic gakhead?”
Cuu’s voice was low but sharp. “Want me to wipe your arse for you
too? Sure as sure you do.”
He laughed.
“You must have got away with murder while I was absent,” said Kolea
softly.
“Huh?”
“You always were a little shit, Cuu, but bullying a brain-damaged vet?
Where the gak is your sense of regimental honour, you insidious pus-ball?”
Cuu’s eyes and mouth opened very wide. He took a step back. The area
immediately around them had fallen very quiet.
Kolea rose to his feet. He towered over the trooper, and his naked torso
and arms were massive, especially next to Cuu’s bony frame.
“You-… you…” Cuu stammered.
“Yeah, me. I’m back. Now run away before I break your rodent neck.”
Cuu ran.
“Sarge?” Lubba said, getting up off his bunk. He was staring at Gol,
blinking fast “Sarge?”
“Morning, Lubba. So, how’s it going?” Kolea said lightly, sitting back
down.
Whispers were spreading, voices talking fast.
“Gol?” Corbec said, appearing from the row end and walking towards
him. Mkvenner was with him.
“Hello, sir.”
Corbec shook his shaggy head. “Gaunt told me about what went on, but I
was keeping it to myself until… until… feth! What happened?”
“Well, it’s a funny thing…” Kolea began. The rest of his sentence was lost
beneath the crushing pressure of Corbec’s bearhug.
“I get the impression his return has been popular,” said Dorden. Zweil made
a chuckling sound and nodded. The doctor pushed Zweil’s chair down the
aisles between the rows of vacated bunks towards the mobbing, clamouring
concentration of troopers in the centre of the billet chamber. Kolea was at the
heart of it, laughing and chatting, answering the barrage of excited questions
as best he could.
Everyone was there, morning drill forgotten. Somebody had ordered in
boxes of hot loaves from a nearby bakery, and sutlers had arrived with
wheeled barrows laden with heated caffeine urns.
No, not everyone, Dorden noted. Away through the rows of bunks, he saw
Lijah Cuu, getting dressed. Every now and then Cuu looked up as laughter
rose from the throng.
“So tell it again…” Varl called. “You did what?”
Kolea shrugged. “I don’t really remember. I was worried about Ven, and
someone had said the baths healed all wounds.”
“That’s what they say,” Lubba nodded, solemnly.
“And she healed you?” asked Soric.
“I guess so. Actually, I think she healed Ven. I was just in the way.”
The Ghosts laughed.
“Do you hear me complaining?” asked Mkvenner.
“Will she heal me?” Varl asked, tapping his augmetic shoulder.
“Not a chance, Ceg. She only cures the deserving.”
More gales of laughter.
“What about me?” asked Domor.
“You’re as bad as Varl, Shoggy,” said Kolea. “And besides, you wouldn’t
be without that enhanced vision now, would you?”
Domor shrugged. “The Emperor protects,” he admitted.
“What about me?” cried Larkin from the back.
“I dunno, Larks. What’s wrong with you?”
“Where do we start?” blurted Bonin. The crowd broke up in guffaws
again.
“Will she cure me?” Chiria asked quietly.
Kolea looked down at her scarred face. She’d never been pretty, but he
knew the scars on her face were the worst thing that had ever happened to
her. He sighed.
“Who knows? I’ll ask her.”
Chiria smiled. Nessa put her arm around her.
“I guess you’ll be wanting your platoon back, Gol,” Criid said.
Kolea shook his head. “I see you’ve been doing a fine job, sergeant. It’ll
be an honour to serve.”
There were cheers and whoops of affirmation. Criid blushed, and Caffran
looked at her with a proud smile.
“I need to thank you, though,” Kolea said as the noise died down.
“Me?” asked Criid. “Should be the other way around. You’ve saved me
twice now, and the first time got you… hurt.”
“Maybe But the second time got me cured.”
“What?”
“I don’t remember much about it, as you will no doubt appreciate, but
when I picked you up in that street, you had this… this effigy thing in your
pocket. A plaster bust. Fething awful thing, it was.”
Criid nodded. “An old guy gave it to me. A pilgrim. It was out in the
Glassworks. He was trying to thank me for looking after him.”
“I found it. It reminded me… reminded my thick head, as was. Made me
think about the Saint and how she cured people. I think that’s what made me
take Ven to the balneary.”
“You kept going on about the fething thing,” Mkvenner confirmed.
“It’s yours anyway,” said Kolea, looking at Criid. “I was just looking after
it.”
She shrugged. “I don’t want it. Gakking eyesore. Just glad it had a use.”
“I would like to see it, if I may,” Zweil slurred. The mob parted politely to
admit the doctor and the old man he was pushing in the chair. Zweil sat at a
strange angle, half his face curiously limp.
“Of course, father,” said Kolea.
“I normally wouldn’t bother over such trinkets,” Zweil said, carefully
enunciating every word, “but my brethren demand that every last detail
surrounding a palpable miracle be scrutinised. It is the holy order of things.”
“It’s in my pack,” Kolea said. He looked round at the troopers.
“I’ll get it, sarge,” said Criid. She disengaged herself from Caffran’s firm
embrace and pushed away through the crowd.
“So, what did it feel like?” called Feygor through his throaty, monotone
vox-box. “Did it hurt?”
“What?”
“The miracle, you feth.”
“Yes,” said Zweil, nodding. “What did it feel like, Gol?”
“I was wondering that myself,” added Dorden.
“Well…”Kolea began.
Behind her, they were laughing and shouting out. Criid moved down through
the rows of empty cots. She could feel the smile on her face. It wouldn’t go.
Kolea was back. Kolea was back! This had to be about the best day of her
life, ever. Right up there along with the day she made sergeant and the day
Caff told her he loved her.
She’d missed Kolea so much she hadn’t realised, and she knew all too
well she owed him everything. She’d have been dead on the streets of
Ouranberg but for him.
She found Kolea’s bunk and was digging through his pack. Everything was
so neat and precise, everything folded and pressed. Kolea would gakking
hate her for the mess she was making.
There was no sign of the effigy. She up-ended the pack and spilled its
contents out onto the mattress. Clothes, ammo packs, a shaving kit, a bootblacker,
a pack of cards, a clutch of hololithic prints stuffed into a yellowing
envelope.
And the effigy. Ugly gakking thing. The garish paint job was worse than
she remembered.
She put it to one side, and began to repack Kolea’s kitbag. The photoprints
fell out of the old envelope as she picked it up.
She looked at them.
A man. A woman. A young boy. A baby. Group shots, individuals. A father
holding his newborn. A mother and her kids.
The man was Gol Kolea. Younger, true. Cleaner. One of him dressed as an
ore-face worker.
She stopped dead.
Though they were years younger, she recognised the faces of the children.
Dalin and Yoncy. And the mother. She’d only known the mother for a few
brief minutes. In carriage station C4/a, Vervunhive. Criid had tried to help
her with her toddler and her baby-cart. Then the shells had started to fall.
Gak! She’d seen this woman die, this woman in the pictures. The mother of
the children Criid now counted as hers.
What the hell were the pictures doing in Gol Kolea’s p—
“No,” she said. “Holy Emperor, no!”
She got up and fell over, pulling the open pack down off the bunk. Kolea’s
stuff fell out onto the floor. She started to scrabble around, collecting them up
and pushing them back into the bag.
An alarm started to sound, so loud, it made her jump.
“Sorry to break things up, ladies,” Rawne cried, sounding anything but sorry.
He pushed his way through the throng of Ghosts around Kolea. Klaxons were
bleating.
“Time for work. The archenemy is orbital and inbound, and we’re
expecting mass ground assault in the next hour. Get dressed, get kitted, get
ready and get moving. If you’re of a faithful disposition, ask the God-
Emperor for his blessing. If you’re a layman, put your head between your
legs and kiss your fething ass goodbye. This is it. The real thing.”
The crowd of Ghosts broke up immediately, troopers running to their
bunks, struggling into clothes, prepping weapons.
“Bad as that?” Corbec asked, coming up alongside Rawne.
“Worse than you can possibly imagine,” replied the major.
On they came. The Incarnadine, the Cicatrice, the Harm’s Way. Running side
by side like hunting dogs, angling in at twenty degrees to the plane of the
ecliptic. And the Revenant? Where was that?
Flanking in from sunward, obliterating pilgrim ships. It had already
incinerated all the transports in the relief convoy.
Esquine tensed. This was still manageable. This was still a tactical
possibility. He had three ships. The Omnia Vincit was a vastly powerful
flagship. The Laudate Divinitus was also capable. The frigate Glory of Cadia
ought to be up to the mark.
Their commanders appeared before him on the deck of the strategium, redshot
holoforms.
Captain Cask of the Glory.
Captain Massinga of the Laudate.
“The Emperor who gives us life also trials us now,” said Esquine.
Both holoforms nodded.
“The odds are not impossible, though they are against us. Massinga, the
Revenant is yours. Take it to hell with all hands.”
“I will, fleet captain.”
“Cask, with me. We take this fight to the heart.”
“The Emperor protects,” crackled Cask’s holoform over the vox.
“Attack speed!” Esquine commanded.
“Attack speed!” Velosade relayed across the strategium.
Valdeemer leaned back against a bulkhead. His heart was thumping.
The gigantic capital ship Omnia Vincit, flanked by its much smaller sister the
frigate Glory of Cadia, powered away from the chilly light of Herodor
towards the trio of archenemy warships.
Beside them for a while, the heavy cruiser Laudate Divinitus turned away
to port, and lit up its thrusters as it burned down towards the Revenant.
The Revenant was picking off pilgrim ships, exploding them like paper
targets on a circus showman’s stall. Some started to run. That just gave the
Revenant moving solutions. Its guns raked through the translucent skein of the
upper atmosphere. Ships exploded and burned.
A flurry of torpedoes from the closing heavy cruiser unsettled the
Revenant’s shields, and it swung up to meet the Imperial warship.
The heavy cruiser was a third again as big as the gold-laced enemy ship.
Its fighter screen puffed out from it like a cloud of dust, and was met
immediately by the rival’s own screen. As the massive vessels closed,
spitting beams of light and sprays of plasma, the tiny fighters billowed
around each other, cloud into cloud, dust particles whirling away to infinity.
The Laudate Divinitus fired a full volley of lances and torpedoes. The
Revenant gunned away, shields flaring flat white. It fired its own cannonade
broadside as it fled across the Laudate’s bows.
The Imperial heavy cruiser shook. One of its shields ruptured. It fired
back.
The Revenant brought its hind part in tight, turning in a forty-five degree
angle on its prow. It came up facing the Laudate, facing the railed shield.
It fired its main lances.
The Laudate Divinitus didn’t explode. It came apart in a series of
coughing, jerking seizures. The final shudder kicked off the enginarium, and
sent out a Shockwave that destroyed nine pilgrim ships at anchor.
The Revenant dipped low into the thin reaches of the upper atmosphere,
and began to disgorge drop-pods and landing craft.
Hundreds of them.
The Glory of Cadia hit the Cicatrice so hard and with such sustain it began to
burn. Esquine was savouring the victory when he saw the enemy ship turn.
The Cicatrice, immolating, spent the last of its reactor power pushing itself
forward. It rammed the Glory amidships and the two vessels locked together,
burning like a small star in close orbit space.
The Harm’s Way and the massive Incarnadine were pummeling the Omnia
Vincit with their batteries. Esquine felt the pain from the shields.
“Target the main ship, Velosade,” he gasped.
Shumlen hit thrust and came in at the open and lit port of the Incamadine’s
starboard launch deck. He felt himself pressed back in the grav seat as the
thrusters kicked in. His heads-up locked in at the hangar bay mouth.
One missile left.
Something flew out at him.
A bat, yes. But really like a bat. A dark, hooked shape. Small, fast, not a
Locust-pattern ship, he was certain. Something xenos. Very xenos.
He banked, hunting. The bat zipped around and was behind him. Shumlen
tried to turn, tried to get an angle so he could loose his last missile. The bat
wouldn’t let him be.
Shumlen turned hard again, and again. He couldn’t lose it.
He turned for one last time and the stall siren howled.
Fuel out. He was drifting.
The bat zipped past him and then turned back, sliding up and coasting up
alongside him.
Shumlen looked at it. His pattern recognition systems bleeped out
confirmation.
A Raven.
A dark eldar Raven attack ship.
It hovered beside him for a second, and then flitted away.
There was no power left in his Lightning. Shumlen looked round, dead in
space. The vast superstructure of the Incarnadine ploughed towards him.
And met him like a cliff face. His tiny craft burst and flared for a second
as it was run down against the massive prow of the battleship. The
Incarnadine didn’t even feel it.
The Raven, circling nearby, dipped its barbed wings once to acknowledge
the fall of a fine pilot, and then turned and burned towards the pallid glow of
Herodor.
The control console of the sleek Raven reflected yellow light up across the
features of Skarwael. He was grinning, a rictus of bared fangs and tight white
flesh.
The bloody game was on.
Every alarm and klaxon in the Civitas Beati was blaring. Even the great
prayer horns at the city quarter-points were wailing terrible rising notes.
Storm shields began to close on all the windows, decks and apertures in the
hive towers, and through the inner precinct of the Civitas. Segmented plating
slid up to protect the glass domes of the agriponic farms.
There was uproar on the streets. Citizens fled en masse to the sub-level
bunkers, to the storm cellars, to the lower levels of the hive towers.
Technically, there were appointed shelters for all, but the protocols were old
and hadn’t been used for generations. Citizens ignored them, or had never
known them, and fled hysterically to the nearest shelter.
The highways and principals of the mid-city and skirt districts were
choked with road traffic. A lot of it had already been mobile at dawn, and it
was swelled by private vehicles heading across town towards imagined
places of safety. The traffic jammed up the routes, solid and nose-to-tail in
places, and transports were quickly abandoned. In some outer streets, the
roads were deserted but for rows of immobile vehicles, some with the
engines still running, most with doors and hatches open.
The main barracks of the Regiment Civitas Beati was an imposing keep that
overlooked Principal I in the high town area, between the gigantic stacks of
hive towers one and two. In the main yard inside the walls, the regiment was
assembling and breaking up into troop elements. Columns of APCs and light
armour units were grumbling up the ramps from the garages under the keep,
directed by marshals to embarkation points where in theory they would pick
up their assigned squads. There was no time for briefing. Instructions would
be delivered en route via tac logis. All anyone knew was that they were
following GAR3 — Ground Assault Response 3 — one of Biagi’s preformed
emergency strategies.
Timon Biagi himself stood in the open top of an armoured command
vehicle, listening to the tac logis flow in his earpiece, watching the
disposition. Troopers, some still buckling up armour, poured out of the keep
and into the yard, filing past the armourers’ platforms to collect munitions
and combat supplies. Biagi was the two hundred and fifth marshal of the
Civitas. From this hour forward it would be his name, and his name alone,
that historians would think of when considering the Regiment Civitas. For he
would be the marshal that stood alongside Sabbat at her Returning. Would
they think of him like they thought of Kiodrus, he wondered? A second
Kiodrus. He liked the feel of that idea.
Biagi looked up at the sky. It was unseasonably clear, and the violet dawn
was turning into a cool white haze In a corner of the sky, the future was
making itself visible. Flashes and strobes of light, a thicket of twinkling
stripes just visible in the growing glare, identified the monumental war now
underway in orbital space. A war between gods, Biagi thought.
From down here where he stood, it looked like firecrackers.
The Ghost and life company elements moved out of the hive towers in rows
of troop trucks and transporters, heading out into the skirt fan of the city. Life
company tanks and tracked armour led the way, smashing rows of stationary,
abandoned vehicles out of their path where they blocked thoroughfares and
junctions.
Gaunt rode in a Salamander with Corbec and Hark. Hydra gun platforms
travelled alongside them for a few streets, and then turned off to left and right
to occupy good firing positions in open squares and plazas in the hilly inner
reaches of the Civitas.
“This is Lugo’s plan?” Hark asked.
Gaunt shook his head. “He’ll take the credit, but it’s actually
Kaldenbach’s.”
“I thought it was too smart for that feth-wipe,” said Corbec, and then
glanced at Hark’s disapproving look.
“Did I say that out loud?” he smiled.
The plan was to assemble the main troop strengths in the city’s
geographical centre, towards the bottom of the Guild Slope, and wait. Even
combined, the Tanith, life company, Regiment Civitas and Herodian PDF had
nothing like enough numbers to cordon the entire perimeter of the sprawling
city. First Officiary Leger had even seconded the city arbites and the local
civic militia forces to bolster the military presence, and still that left them
lacking in numerical resources.
The Imperial forces would loiter in the city centre, from which point any
part of the city extent was as near as any other, and wait to see what direction
the ground assault came from. Then they would respond fast, using transports,
and channel their efforts in that particular area.
It was impossible to tell where the first wave of assault would come from.
Gaunt had been through too many assaults from orbit — as assaulter and
assaulted both — to think otherwise. There were so many variables.
From the data, Gaunt had seen, there were at least four archenemy
warships up above them. Unopposed, their combined firepower could raze
the Civitas down to the bedrock: streets, habs, hive-towers, even the
armoured shelters underground. If the enemy decided not to bother with the
complexity and effort of a ground assault and simply went for the kill, this
war would be over before it started.
There was one saving grace Gaunt was counting on—
“Sir!” Gaunt looked round as Corbec called out. The big Tanith was
pointing up at the northern sky.
High up, streaks of orange fire were slashing across the pale sky. A few
dozen at first, and then more. Hundreds more Like a shower of meteorites,
they rained down from high orbit overhead, diving north, leaving long,
perfectly straight, perfectly parallel trails of flame and vapour in the sky
behind them.
They weren’t meteorites.
Gaunt saw distant flashes light up the northern horizon as the first hit. A
second later, a distant sound like continuous thunder rolled in from the Great
Western Obsidae.
Drop-pods. For a half-second, Gaunt felt relieved. The archenemy was
going for ground assault after all. Then he reconsidered. Death was not going
to be swift and total. It was going to be slow and painful and hard.
But at least, if that was the case, he and his men had a chance to make it
mutual.
“Ensign! Ensign!”
There was a voice in Valdeemer’s dream, calling his name, and it
wouldn’t go away.
He blinked and found himself lying on his back in the strategium of the
Omnia Vincit.
“Ensign Valdeemer! Are you alive?”
Valdeemer sat up and looked around. The air was full of smoke and
flashing alarm lights and the baleful screech of klaxons and damage alarms.
“Ensign!”
He got up. The deck shook hard, and he steadied himself against a console.
The crew servitor at the console was still working furiously, augmetic hands
rippling over the display. The mechanical was totally oblivious to the chaos
around them.
Valdeemer shook his head, trying to lose the swollen muzziness. Blood
spattered on the deck. He raised his hand and felt a deep gash across his
forehead.
They’d been hit.
He’d been at Esquine’s side when the torpedo had struck them under the
bridge tower. He remembered the numbing concussion, bodies flying. Yes,
that’s right. He’d been thrown to the deck.
How long had he been out?
“Ensign!”
He lurched forward towards Fleet Captain Esquine’s throne.
“Sir?”
“I need you to man the main station. Can you do that?” Esquine looked like
he was in pain, struggling, but there wasn’t a mark on him.
“Sir? That’s the commander’s post.”
“Do it!”
Valdeemer turned and hurried through the smoke towards the main station.
The deck was littered with smouldering debris and fallen panelling. He had
to step over several bodies. Crewmen, deck aides, servitors, ripped apart by
blast force or killed by flying debris.
One of them was Velosade. A piece of deck plating the size of a dinner
plate had almost, but not quite, decapitated him.
Swallowing hard, Valdeemer got to the station and reviewed the board.
Three shield failures. Two hull breaches. Fires on decks seven through
eighteen and also in carrier bay four. Lances were out. Structural integrity
was down to forty-seven per cent.
“Help me, Valdeemer,” Esquine whispered, his fingers flexing.
Valdeemer tried to assemble a plan in his mind. His ringers flew across
the console, activating and deactivating runes as they lit up, calling up
displays — enginarium, structural, shielding, deck-to-deck — and then
cancelling them. He routed power away from the huge firestorm on deck
eight. He bypassed two cogitator nodes damaged on deck eleven and brought
lance number three back on line. He sealed the deck hatches that had not
closed automatically and shut off the oxygen supply fuelling the lower deck
fires. He shut down reactor two, which was red-lining and clearly damaged,
and kicked in auxiliary power from the redundant reactor in the Omnia
Vincit’s belly.
Why hadn’t Esquine already done these things? They were obvious,
standard. The great capital ship was bleeding and burning to death, and
Esquine hadn’t even begun to apply emergency procedures.
“Report?”
“Damage is contained. I’ve got a lance back on line. We’re painfully
weak, but I’d like to divert all power from the engines to the shields.”
“Do it Valdeemer!”
“I… I need the command override, sir. I’m not rank authorised!”
“The code is Vesta 1123!”
Valdeemer’s bloody hands shook as they entered the code. He diverted
power, ignoring the protesting howls of the tech-priests.
“Fighter screen?” Esquine urged.
“All but gone. Their small ships are all over us.”
“Where is the enemy?” Esquine asked.
Valdeemer looked round at the fleet captain. “The Incarnadine is flanking
us to port, sir, and returning full and sustained broadsides. Shields at thirtyfive
per cent. The Harm’s Way is off the starboard bow, training main lances.
Sir… can’t you see this?”
“No,” said Esquine, his voice barely audible above the alarms and vox
chatter.
The torpedo strike had vaporised the fleet captain’s mind-impulse link,
severing his connection to the massive ship. He was blind and deaf and
lacking in all telepresent or hardwired connection to the Omnia Vincit,
except for the waves of pain that washed through the ship into him as it took
damage.
“Oh Holy Terra…” breathed Valdeemer, realising this. That meant he was
in command. He, a junior ensign, was actually in control of the Imperial
battleship Omnia Vincit.
How many times had he dreamed of command? How many hours had he
spent longing for such a role?
Not like this. Gods of Terra, not at all like this…
“Orders, fleet captain?” he shouted over the din.
Esquine’s answer was just a whisper. “Kill them all… and if you can’t do
that, make the price of our lives a dear one.”
The Incarnadine used its attitude thrusters to push in closer to the stricken
Omnia Vincit. Its port batteries maintained their savage bombardment. The
Incarnadine’s constant scan-sweeps of the Omnia Vincit showed that it was
dead in the water, its combined reactor power channelled from engines to
shields. Massively protected, it was still a sitting target.
The Harm’s Way, sitting off to bow-starboard of the Imperial warship,
began to concentrate its lance blasts at the weak points of shielding, at the
hasty overlap that barely covered the torpedo wound which had blown the
fifth dorsal shield away and crippled the fleet captain.
The Omnia Vincit shook as the Harm’s Way got a good, solid hit in. A huge
section of upper hull splintered and peeled away.
The Omnia Vincit fired its reactivated lance and struck the Harm’s Way’s
shields so hard it was forced to back off. The Imperial gunnery crews,
sweating and half dead, cheered.
The combined fighter fleets of the Incarnadine and the Harm’s Way, which
had already obliterated the Omnia Vincit’s fighter screen, concentrated their
efforts around carrier bay three on the starboard side. The last of the
Lightnings were atomised by the waves of Locusts—“bats”, as the Imperial
Navy slang called them — gunning in, cannons flashing.
Three Locusts managed to enter the deck mouth. One was destroyed by AF
turret emplacements inside the deckway. The second was also hit by AF fire,
but managed to fire all six of its missiles into the belly of the carrier hold
before it went up.
The third, accelerating to hypersonic, made it in down the main launch
deck, strafing as it went, and banked right into the munitions loading bay.
There, just before it catastrophically ran out of flying space, it dumped its
payload into the sub-deck autoloader shafts that lifted munitions up to the
earner deck from the armoured heart of the Omnia Vincit.
The chain reaction blew the side off the noble Imperial ship in a vast
flurry of underdeck explosions and fragmenting hull plates. Gored, its guts
exposed, the Omnia Vincit yawed. In the strateghim, Valdeemer desperately
converted three per cent of shield power back to the engines and pushed the
battleship out from between the vicing archenemy ships.
The Omnia Vincit slid forward out of the Incarnadine’s fire-field. A three
per cent drop on shield power wasn’t much, but the Harm’s Way, waiting at
the bow like a jackal on a kill, didn’t hesitate. It cycled up full load power
from its main reactors and fired its lances at the overlay weakness.
Valdeemer turned from his post to look at Esquine. The fleet captain was
shaking with rage and sorrow, impotent and agonised.
“I’m sorry, sir,” said Valdeemer, “but I’m afraid—”
He was incinerated before he could speak another word. Esquine was
incinerated too, his golden throne melting around his combusting body.
Blaze-fire swept through the strategium and out across the bridge, burning
crewmen where they stood and vaporising control stations. The deep,
glasteel ports fronting the bridge shattered and blew outwards under the
superheated overpressure. The remaining shields failed.
The Incarnadine flurried off one final broadside to put the Omnia Vincit
out of its death throes. Blown open, twisted, ruptured, its hull crackling with
diffusing electric discharges, the Omnia Vincit rolled over.
The archenemy ships, satisfied, depowered their weapon systems,
cancelled shields, and coasted away into high anchor station.
The burned-out ruin of the Omnia Vincit remained in orbit around Herodor
for nine hundred and three years, until slowly decaying, unadjusted orbit
rates finally sank it down through the gravity well into the atmosphere, where
it burned up. The parts of it that survived atmosphere-kiss and heat-shear
filled the skies of the southern continent like shooting stars, and hailed down
onto the Lesser Southern Dry Sea, creating impact scars and craters that later
became radioactive lakes in that distant wilderness.
But that, of course, took place a long time after every person in this
account was many centuries dead.
The mighty Incarnadine and the frigate Harm’s Way drew in tight alongside
the Revenant, and began to disgorge the drop-pods and landers of the assault
force. What had been hundreds became thousands. Troop pods banged down
like tracer bullets. Drop-ships swam away from the carrier decks and began
to bank down towards the surface. Heavy landers uncoupled and entered
descent mode.
At the rear end of the Incarnadine’s belly, an armoured iris valve slunked
open and a small object fired out. Tiny, it had its own integral void shield,
and shot like a missile down through the Herodian atmosphere. It left a
smoking contrail behind it.
Its solitary occupant had set the trajectory. Now he rode, numb, down
towards the planet surface. He had no other awareness except the hunger for
blood.
Her blood.
The tumult and concussion of the steep, fast fall was nothing to him.
He dropped like a rocket just beyond the Glassworks quarter of the
Civitas. His impact cratered the obsidae for five hundred metres in all
directions and kicked out a shockwave flash so hard and bright the Imperials
thought for a moment that the archenemy had decided to fire from orbit after
all. He had been very precise about his landing site. The force of his landing
drove him down through the planet’s crust and into the deep-seated darkness
of the aquifer itself.
His pod splintered through sediment, rolled and came to rest, steaming.
He fired the explosive bolts and got out slowly. He was in a subterranean
cavern, steaming with thermal waters.
He got to his feet and shambled forward. His every step shook the ground.
His feet were massive, hydraulic limbs. His augmetic sensors began to chase
and hunt, reflecting off the glossy limestone walls of the cave.
He set off, hunting his quarry. His name was Karess.
Out on the Great Western Obsidae, the drop-pods were raining in. A thick
wave of dust was kicking out from their impacts. Drop-ships were circling
down too, landing claws extended as they settled in.
The lander’s hatch dropped open and fifty Blood Pact troopers hurled
themselves out into the cold waste. Ahead, through the dust walls, they could
see the rising terraces and towers of the Civitas Beati.
Following the troopers out, the Marksman looked at the city. His brethren
were fanning off in a wide formation.
The Marksman took off his pack and set it on the dusty ground. He pulled
out the sections of his long-las and fitted it together. He kept the scope in his
pocket, away from the dust. He was dressed in the dull red uniform of the
Blood Pact and had the iron visor and palm-scars to prove his association.
His name was Saul. He was, by any standards of measure, the finest sniper
currently attached to the Blood Pact coterie.
Resting the long-las across his shoulder, he began to jog towards the city.
The troop lander settled down in a halo of dust but, unlike its companions, it
did not lift off again. It sat there on the obsidae, its turbofan engines dying.
They’d got bored. It had only been a twenty minute ride down from the
Incamadine’s carrier bays to the surface, but they’d got bored and hungry.
The co-pilot had been a fine plaything for a few minutes, but he had
ultimately disappointed: heart failure through terror before they’d got to the
kill. The pilot himself had been better sport. They’d pinned him and forced
him to execute a safe landing, peeling off his scalp with their talons all the
while.
The moment they had set down safely, they had cracked his bared skull and
fed on his brains.
Now there was work to be done That meant they had to go to the human
mass living-structure in the distance. The idea was distasteful, but Chto, who
had brood command, reminded the other two about the rewards on offer.
Their memories were short. Once they were reminded, they got excited.
The triplets slipped away from the dormant lander, their wet grey bodies
sliding together as they coursed through the obsidae on their bellies.
Their flechette cannons were loaded and armed.
He settled his Raven in to land on an outcrop of the Stove Hills. The Civitas
looked far away.
Skarwael popped his canopy and climbed out of his tiny craft. Between
him and the city, assault landers and drop-pods were falling like torrential
rain.
If he didn’t get started, it would all be over. And he didn’t want that.
Hellfire take the sniper, and the Pater with his runt-psykers, and the loxatl
filth, and the death-machine too.
This was his kill. His kill. The martyr would be his, and he would wear
her screams like precious stones.
He was a mandrake, after all. Nothing in creation understood the art of
secret murder better than him.
EIGHT
GAR 3
“If you are the last man standing, you’re not fighting hard enough.”
—attr. Kaldenbach’s commissars
Mkoll cried “Down!” His voice, seldom heard so forcefully, echoed over the
vox link and everyone, even Gaunt and Rawne, obeyed.
Casting a brief, blurred shadow and visible only for a second, something
hook-winged swept low across the hab-block streets. A moment later, blasts
tore through the buildings to their left.
The Locust had come in against the wind, its jet-whine inaudible until the
last minute. Gaunt had no idea how Mkoll had spotted it.
“The city-shield must be down already,” Rawne muttered, getting up. Ash
and brick dust from the blasts were drifting across them.
“Not necessarily,” Gaunt replied. “It’s only a climate shield. A surface
bomber like that, with its forward screens maxed up…”
As if demonstrating the colonel-commissar’s point, two more Locusts, in
fore and aft formation, whooshed east-west across the city limits about half a
kilometre ahead of them. The one-man assault craft, black bodies glinting in
the sun, were travelling at rooftop height. They banked up and away into the
sunlight, rolling. In their wake, fireballs rippled and flared along the surface.
The Ghosts could hear the popping, banging reports.
There were other sounds too. The constant thump and slam of artillery and
armour guns from all along the city’s northern skirt. Occasionally, when the
wind was in the right direction, they could hear the fierce crackle of smallarms
exchanges.
Lugo and his staff strategae had taken over the Civitas tac logis, and were
overseeing, literally, the Imperial efforts from the high levels of the hive
towers. From there, they were able to despatch remarkably accurate and
current assessments of the archenemy invasion. All of it was bad news.
Four strike columns had assembled in the Great Western and Northern
Obsidaes within fifty minutes of set down, mobilising fast and spearing into
the northern city limits. One was driving into the Glassworks from the northwest,
two directly south into Ironhall, and the fourth from the north-east into
the Masonae district. Most of this seemed to be light assault armour from
landers and storm-troop brigades from the first wave of drop-pods. In total,
close to three hundred vehicle elements and eight thousand men, well
supported by air cover and the artillery sections setting up in the obsidaes.
That, under any circumstances, would have been bad enough. Imperial
numbers in the Civitas Beati hovered just under the seventeen thousand mark,
provided militia and arbites units were figured in. But the Imperials had only
something in the order of one hundred and eighty armoured machines, of
which seventy were unarmed carriers. No air cover. No artillery apart from
some light Regiment Civitas field pieces.
This lop-sided equation became a joke when the rest of the picture was
factored in. Out in the drop zone, behind the initial, fast mobilising enemy
spearhead, a vast force was assembling. It was taking its time, ferrying
armour and squads down in wave after wave of drop-ships and heavy
lander-transports. It would let the spearhead forces take the brunt and crack
the city open. Then it would move in to consolidate. Out on the obsidaes, tac
logis calculated, over half a million men and a hundred thousand fighting
machines waited to mount the second wave. And the count was rising with
every incoming wave.
Well commanded, and with a feth-load of luck on their side, Gaunt
estimated, the Imperial resistance would last five, maybe six days before
annihilation. With Lugo in the chair, they probably had about two. It was
death either way. The only variable was time.
Supported by sections of the Regiment Civitas Beati, the Ghosts advanced
through the Masonae district, over which Gaunt had defence command.
Kaldenbach was leading the Ironhall resistance, and a Herodian PDF colonel
called Vibreson headed the Glassworks line. Biagi, and a life company
officer, Major Landfreed, held most of the remaining four thousand troop
strengths in the middle city, ready for short-notice deployment. Five hundred
men of the Regiment Civitas garrisoned the hive quarter, mainly. Gaunt
believed, to buy enough time in the final, inevitable phase of the invasion for
Lugo to flee via shuttle from the crest level platforms. Flee to where, only the
God-Emperor knew.
The Ghosts and their allies moved up through the narrow streets east of
Beati Plaza. This district was largely untouched by war, apart from the
strafing damage of the enemy air cover. The thoroughfares were ominously
empty. The citizenry had fled. Homes and commercial properties stood empty
and lifeless, and discarded possessions littered the roads.
As they prowled forward, bounding cover by squad from block corner to
block corner, Gaunt considered they had, despite everything, a kind of luck
on their side. Unopposed as they now were, the archenemy warships far
above them could have ended the war quickly with aerial bombardment.
Instead, the enemy had opted for the gross effort and huge cost of a ground
assault. He knew what that meant.
They wanted the Beati.
Poorly protected and underdefended as it was, the Civitas Beati was still
large, and taking it a street at a time would be a bloody, painfully expensive
task for any army. The archenemy was only undertaking it because of the
prize. Indeed, the archenemy had only come to Herodor, only bothered with
the place at all, because of that prize. The enemy commander wanted the
Saint. A body, at least… but a prisoner, that would be the greatest trophy. So
an annihilating orbital bombardment was out of the question. No tangible
proof of the Beati’s presence would be left.
This was all about Sabbat. Everything they did, everything the enemy did.
It was all about Sabbat.
Tac logis crackled in Gaunt’s ear. Kaldenbach’s forces had engaged.
Gaunt was about to relay this to his officers when Mkoll voxed again.
“Contact!”
Initially unopposed, the invaders rolled into the northern edges of the
Masonae district. To the west of them, smoke and low-level flashes above
the roofs showed where their associated columns were lancing through the
Ironhall.
Phalanxes of Blood Pact led the way, backed by files of stalk-armour,
STeG 4 lights and AT70 Reaver-pattern tanks. Their way was unhindered.
Two AT70s peeled off to destroy the prayer horn Gorgonaught in a hail of
close range fire, and a trio of stalk-tanks assisted Blood Pact sappers in
blowing and cutting the ancient arches of the Simeon Aqueduct. Water, the
city’s precious life-blood, poured from the shattered aqueduct and flooded
several low-lying street blocks. Locust dive bombing had already ruined the
North End Agridome. Burning crop produce was billowing yellow-grey
smoke into the sky through the ruptured dome seals.
Without seeing a trace of the vaunted Imperial forces, the archenemy
crossed Brigat Street into Actes Hill, and began to spread out into the
Masonae.
The troopers, moving ahead of the armour, were singing. The song made
Mkoll’s stomach heave.
“We’ll have to put a stop to that at least,” he murmured. He took aim.
“Ease!” he warned.
Mkoll squeezed the tube’s trigger spoon and an AT rocket roared down the
street, neatly killing the third STeG 4 in the approaching file.
The AT70 behind it started to rev, and spattered fire from its coaxial
cannon, but it was pretty much blinded by the black smoke ripping out of the
dead STeG.
The two STeGs in front of the kill spurred forward on their heavy, solid
wheels, their compact turrets traversing as they hunted for the source of the
ambush. The Blood Pact stopped singing and raced for cover positions.
They didn’t get very far. Surch and Loell were set up on the west side of
the street, Melyr and Caill on the east. The two .50 cannons had a tight,
interlocking field of fire, and preyed on the scattering ground troops
mercilessly. Red-armoured bodies tumbled, sprawled, flew backwards, flew
apart.
The two STeGs up front wheeled round, now firing, raking the lines of the
street and blowing out windows and plaster facades. In another few seconds
they would lock on to one of the .50 positions.
But they didn’t have anything like a few seconds.
Caffran’s tread fether bucked and banged, and a smoking rocket slammed
down from his upper storey position, blowing one of the STeGs in half.
“Ease,” Mkoll said again, reloaded by Harjeon. He hit the remaining
STeG’s munitions locker. The Shockwave brought the front of a nearby house
down.
The AT70 lurched forward, grinding up and over the blazing wreckage of
the first kill. As it came over, it fired its main gun. The roar was loud and
impressive, but the shot was premature and whined away into the empty end
of the street.
Caffran put his second rocket through the big, red tank’s port tracks and
crippled it. It slewed around, broken wheel bearings shrieking raw on the
rockcrete.
Ghosts slipped from cover and leapt up onto its superstructure: Bonin,
Domor and Dremmond. Bonin nailed the top hatch with a tube-charge, and
left the rest to Dremmond. Gleefully reunited with his flamer, Dremmond
pushed the hose muzzle down into the smoking hatch-hole and gutted the tank
with combusting promethium.
Bonin dropped down, grabbing the dead 70’s pintle mount — a twinlinked
bolter — and swung back to face down the street. He started to fire at
the Blood Pact infantry squads pressing up to meet the ambush.
“Duck or dance, choice is yours,” he chuckled grimly as the heavy weapon
mount shuddered in his hands.
“That’s enough! Off and out!” Mkoll called over the link.
Bonin, Domor and Dremmond quit the top of the tank and disappeared into
the alleys off the street. At the same moment, the .50 teams dismantled their
support weapons and hastened out of their positions.
Pushing forward rather more tentatively now, the Blood Pact advance
reached the dead AT70. There was no sign of enemy resistance.
But there was a pack of three tube-charges strapped to the AT70’s shell
magazine, courtesy of Shoggy Domor.
Three streets away, the lead stalk-tank was hit simultaneously by two tread
fether rounds. Wrapped in a brilliant fireball, it spun around, some of its legs
thrashing out slackly like a carousel’s arms. One leg severed entirely, and
flew off, crashing through the front of a habitat unit.
Unfazed, the two stalk-tanks behind it scuttled forward over the burning
debris, weapons pods tracking and firing, and each one was greeted by a
rocket that blew its main hull to pieces. One collapsed, the other remained on
its feet, limb segments dead and locked out, central body ablaze.
“That’s the way to do it,” Colm Corbec grinned, lowering his empty rocket
tube. He was up on the low roof of a hab building, behind the parapet. Varl’s
platoon was dashing forward, along the line of the wall beneath him, in
single file, firing into the bewildered Blood Pact troopers who suddenly
found themselves without armour support.
Brostin’s flamer gushed. Corbec could hear the enemy screaming.
“Now!” ordered Meryn, stone-faced.
Guheen pulled the trip wire and the tube-charges fourteen platoon had laid
across the roadway ignited in geysers of fire and rockcrete. The AT70 almost
flipped, its tracks blown away. It came down hard on its nose, the long snout
of its main gun biting into the roadway before it came up.
It made the mistake of trying to fire. Either its barrel was deformed by the
impact or dogged. Whichever, the hi-ex shell choked, and blew back so hard
the rear portion of the turret vented out like a burst paper bag.
Blood Pact infantry flooded up around the burning beast and began firing.
One, an officer, had a missile tube on his shoulder, and he dropped to one
knee, aiming it at the store front where Meryn and Guheen were down in
cover.
He never got to fire it. At least, not alive. A hot-shot round from Nessa
Bourah, up on a nearby roof, tore out his throat. He fell sideways and his
dead hand spasmed on the spoon.
The rocket winnowed away across the ground, spewing sparks and white
flames. One Blood Pact trooper actually managed to leap up over it. He then
died, along with the other dozen around him, when the rocket met the kerb
and detonated.
The archenemy forces penetrating the Masonae suddenly realised they were
in for a fight after all. They pushed on, resolved now.
In Latinate Road, a slender, picturesque street of tailors’ shops and
leatherworkers’ habs, Daur, Raglon and Ewler brought their platoons in tight
to meet the Blood Pact storm-thrust. A ferocious small-arms battle began.
Nearby, Arcuda’s platoon — twenty-three — met a flanking push from
another five Blood Pact fire-teams. Criid pulled her platoon back from
Meryn’s position and joined with Curral’s, Nailer’s and Rask’s at the
junction of Toborio Street and Mason Yard, where a vicious, mid-range
infantry duel was developing.
Grell and Theiss scurried their platoons in across the Lanxlyn Road and
Principal III, smoking two STeGs and a stalk-tank before meeting the infantry
rush head on.
In Skye Alley, Soric’s platoon was pinned down by a pair of stalk-tanks
that wouldn’t go away. They cowered under the deluge of laser fire, stone
chips and debris fluttering around them.
“Gak!” Soric coughed. “Gak this!”
“Support fire! Support fire needed now!” Commissar Hark, crouching
nearby, snarled into his vox. “Support to grid two-six, five-nine! Respond!”
“Ask it for help, chief,” Vivvo yelled over the gunfire. “For gale’s sake!”
“Ask what?” Soric replied, ducking down.
“The thing in your pocket!” Vivvo bawled.
“The what?”
“The thing, chief! The thing that knows!”
“What thing?” asked Hark, looking round at them.
“The kid’s just being funny,” Soric said.
“Trooper Vivvo?”
“I… I was just being funny, commissar, sir…” stammered Vivvo, realising
the implications of his words. He was loyal to Soric above all things.
Another salvo rained in.
Soric scurried away head down. Once he was behind a door frame, and
out of Hark’s sight, he scooped the twitching message shell out of his pocket
and opened it.
Kazel has the angle, but he can’t see it. Tell him to go for the window.
He’ll know.
What about the rest, Agun? She’s going to die and her blood will be on
your hands.
“Shut up!” Soric yelled aloud, tearing the paper into scraps. He got on the
micro-bead link.
“Kazel? Go for the window. Go for the window.”
“Chief?”
“Go for the gakking window, Kazel!”
Up in a fourth storey room, Kazel turned and fired his tread fether out of
the window. It was a hasty, automatic response to Soric’s command. The
back-blast, contained in the room, almost killed him.
The rocket spat out of the window, deflected sideways off a lamp-bracket
and dropped down, entering one of the stalk-tanks through the roof hatch.
As it died, it went into death throes, destroying its companion with
insensible, random weapon-pod bursts.
“Shit…” said Kazel, looking down out of the window, his ears still
ringing. “Did I do that?”
As his Ghosts engaged, Gaunt conceded he had to hand it to Biagi. Biagi had
drawn up GAR 3 — Ground Assault Response 3 — and it was on the money.
Rather than wasting time attempting to hold badly provisioned outer streets,
Biagi’s plan had identified and described the various junctions and streetmeets
where ambush and defence would work most effectively. It was
pragmatic in that it gave ground to an invading enemy until good advantage
could be had in defence, but it was thorough. Biagi had analysed every street
— not by slate-chart but by eye, by methodical observation — and worked
out the strengths and weaknesses. He had read the city well. The Ghosts’
initial successes were as much down to Biagi’s tactical intelligence as they
were the Tanith battle skills.
Gaunt carried GAR 3 on him in a data-slate file, encrypted in case the
device fell into enemy hands. Each time he read it adjusting the fluid
disposition of his force, he admired Biagi’s work. He regretted the fact that
the next time he and the marshal met up, it would no doubt be to clash. It was
inevitable. Biagi had yet to find out that Gaunt had deployed flamers.
Even with GAR 3, it was down to the wire. The battle for the Masonae
district had become focused on Latinate Road and Mason Yard, with minor
skirmishes along Principal HI and the atmosphere processor in Tesk Hill
Square.
Gaunt waved Beltayn over and got on the vox, moving Daur’s platoon and
three PDF sections right up Principal HI to a sub-access lane that let out into
the east side of Mason Yard. Within fifteen minutes, Daur’s force had the
enemy’s Mason Yard action in flank assault.
Gaunt’s own trick to complement GAR 3, based on years of experience,
was to keep his forces tightly engaged with the leading edge of the enemy
advance The invasive force was like an arm reaching blindly around an
obstacle Every time it came forward, the Ghosts grabbed it by the fingers and
severed it at the wrist. By staying close to that leading edge, they
discouraged air-cover attacks. The Locust pilots, even on low passes, even
with the aid of smoke canisters and ident transponders, could not
differentiate between friend or foe in the narrow, clustered streets.
Just before noon, stymied across a nine-block front, the invaders pulled
back sharply and tried to redirect along Principal HI itself. They led off this
new phase with an armour charge — nine AT70s and four stalk-tanks,
advancing at cruise speed behind a pair of AT83 Brigand-pattern giants.
Corbec and Domor had their platoons in cover in a side-street off the
Principal highway, and heard the revving turbines and clattering tracks
before anyone else.
“Treads! Treads! On the highway!” Corbec voxed urgently. The Ghosts
had to stay low. As they spurred on, the enemy AFVs were raking the sides of
the wide boulevard with their pintle-mounts and coaxial cannons. Gaunt had
pretty much anticipated this push. Domor’s squad had already laced the
Principal with tube-charges, the detonation of which took out one AT70 and
slowed the entire charge right down as the AT83s lowered their dozer blades
and began to clear the way.
Slowed down was good enough for Gaunt. His next signal brought three
life company Vanquishers out of hiding in the warehouses beside Mason
Yard. The Wild One, the Demands With Menaces and the Access Denied, all
Gryphonne FV-pattern Leman Russ battle tanks with the trademark long guns.
Hurling specialist AT shells, the three Imperial tanks got down to business,
their first three or four salvoes turning the Blood Pact’s well-ordered chase
advance into a bloody riot. The Wild One crippled one of the big AT83s with
its first shot and killed it with its second. The AT83 Brigands, larger than
their more primitive cousins the 70s, were, on paper, the Urdeshi forge
world’s equivalent of the Leman Russ. They had auspex guidance, weapon
stabilisers and torsion bar suspension. They were the Blood Pact’s best
battle machines, not counting the very few ancient super-heavies they had
inherited from defeated Guard units.
But there was just something about the Leman Russ. Its pedigree and
reputation was second to none. When a Vanquisher or Conqueror appeared,
the very sight of it filled Imperial hearts with pride and enemy hearts with
fear. This, Corbec thought as he watched the engagement from a sheltered
doorway, seemed to be the case now. Apparently numbed at the sight of three
Vanquishers powering up in formation, the remaining 83 began to reverse
hard. So hard, it ran into and over a stalk-tank, splintering its comparatively
fragile frame.
An AT70 blew out under fire from the Demands With Menaces, and two
more were rendered into scrap by the Wild One. One of the stalk-tanks
strutted forward past the burning carcass of the first Brigand, its metal
hooves chipping at the rockcrete roadway, and trained its weapon pods on
the Access Denied. Twin double-pulse lasers flickered and chattered, and
blast flashes blossomed across the Vanquisher’s upper hull and turret. The
Access Denied, seemingly oblivious, rolled forward, trailing smoke from
burning ablative plates and scorched paintwork, and fired a single shell that
disintegrated the stalk-tank’s body segment so completely the port and
starboard limb structures collapsed outwards, bisected.
An AT70 lobbed a shell at the Wild One that tore away its sponson and
part of its track skirt. Another hit the Demands With Menaces on the turret
destroying its vox-mast, pintle mount and laser range-finder, and killing the
assistant gunner with explosive spalling.
Wounded but not down, the Demands With Menaces plunged forward,
laying its guns at the Reaver responsible. Corbec saw the top-hatch pop and
the commander emerge, oblivious to the danger, to verify aim with a
handscope now his range-finder was junked.
He knew his job. The Demands rolled to a halt and jolted hard as it fired,
jerking plumes of accumulated white dust off its surfaces and hull grooves
like sifted flour. The sound of the hypervelocity AT shell was just a crisp,
flat clap in the augmented air. The AT70 made a much fuller and more
satisfying sound as it exploded.
“Sir!” Corbec looked away from the show the life company tankers were
putting on, and glanced at Domor.
“What’s up, Shoggy?”
Domor pointed, looking across the street into the shadowed alleys that
came up through a hab compound onto the highway. Corbec glimpsed
movement behind the roadway’s rockcrete revetment.
Enemy infantry. Fanning forward under the cover of the tank duel.
No, more than that. There were two or maybe three fire-teams over there,
lugging tube launchers and long-stemmed rocket grenade bulbs.
They were going for the Vanquishers while they were occupied.
“Smart eyes, Shoggy,” Corbec called, stating the fething obvious. “Five
men… with me now!” he added, not caring who responded but knowing at
least five would. Milo, Nehn, Bonin, Chiria and Guthrie were the first up,
scrambling after him, heads down.
Corbec followed the enemy’s example, and moved back down the side of
the Principal behind the high revetment. He came to a break about fifteen
metres south of the Wild One’s rumbling hindquarters, and dropped down,
adjusting his micro-bead.
“Shoggy, this is two, come back to me.”
“Two, clear.”
“Gonna rush across, mate. On a count of five—”
“Across the highway, chief?”
“Don’t interrupt a man in the grip of a suicidal urge, Shogs. The count will
be five. Draw up your unit and the rest of mine and hose that far side. Don’t
worry about hitting anything, just keep ’em ducking.”
“Understood is not quite the right word, but okay.”
“Good. Five, four, three, two—”
The rapidly assembled guns of twelve and two platoons started to rip and
crackle, firing across the wide, sunlit roadway in front of the Imperial tanks.
The las-rounds, and the solid slugs from the .50 teams, mottled the rockcrete
revetment furiously until it looked like waxy cheese or the surface of a
particularly unlucky moon.
Corbec started to run. The others went with him, Milo and Bonin
overtaking him. They came up hard, backs to the outer side of the revetment
and waited. Corbec checked his rifle’s load and then shot them all a wink.
“You want to live forever?” he asked.
They all nodded. Milo laughed.
“Then follow me.”
They were up in a second and round the revetment through the nearby gap,
into the cool shadows of the highway’s far-side walkway.
The nearest Blood Pact fire-team was crouching down, locking an RPG
into their tube. They looked up in surprise.
That was about all they had time for. The six Imperial las-guns killed them
all so fast they didn’t even have time to rise. Bodies fell, crouched or
squatting.
Ten metres behind them, the second ambush team had time to react. Lasfire
chopped in the Ghosts’ direction and Guthrie fell over with a moaning
curse.
Milo and China led the firefight, firing on auto. Milo shot the tube-gunner
in the neck, and his ammo-man in the hand, shoulder and face. Chiria
whooped as she aced the Pacter who had hit Guthrie, and wasted the man
beside him.
The other two started to run for cover. Nehn crisped off a shot that hit one
in the back of the head and dropped him flat on his face. Bonin got the other.
Corbec had knelt down beside Guthrie.
“You still with me, lad?”
“Yes… yes… feth, it hurts!”
A las-round had gone through Guthrie’s left thigh. It had cauterised itself,
but he’d lost a good chunk of meat and it was so clean-through you could see
daylight from the other side.
Corbec took out his field dressings and started to patch Guthrie’s leg,
smacking a one-shot needle-vial of morphia into the flesh above his hip first.
“Colonel!” Corbec heard Milo cry out.
He started to turn. A las-round. In flight, at full velocity, passing so close
beside his face that he felt its stinging heat He smelt the sheath of ozone
fuming off it.
If he hadn’t turned his head at the sound of Milo’s warning, it would have
hit him squarely between ear and eye. The round exploded harmlessly against
the roadwall.
“Feth me…” Corbec gasped.
There was a third Blood Pact fire-team, and it had gone into cover when
the first two were attacked.
They had the very positive advantage of decent cover. There were six of
them, counting by the muzzle flashes from the shadowed doorways and
arches down the walkway. Las-shots smashed into the ground and wall
around the pinned Imperials. Chiria threw Nehn flat and most probably saved
his life.
Bonin started to fire back from the hip. Milo grabbed Guthrie and began to
haul him towards the nearest cover… ten metres back down the walkway.
Corbec knew they would all be dead in seconds.
He grabbed the fallen Blood Pact rocket tube off the deck, swung it end
over end like a baton to get it across his shoulder pointing the right way and
yelled, “Ease!”
Automatically, Nehn, Chiria, Bonin, Milo and even Guthrie, cried the same
word aloud. The drilled answer-response meant their mouths would be open
when the rocket fired, and therefore their eardrums wouldn’t burst under the
savagely unequal pressure.
The bulbous rocket flared down the walkway, passing over Bonin so close
it scorched the fabric of his jacket’s back. It entered the narrow angle of a
doorway ten metres beyond and detonated. The flash was blinding, and the
concussion wave brutal. Fragments of stone and pieces of enemy trooper
flushed out in the firewash and pelted the inside face of the roadwall.
One surviving Blood Part trooper, caught by the edges of the blast,
stumbled out into the walkway, tearing off his helmet and iron visor,
screaming. Bonin had been knocked flat by the concussion, but Milo got up
fast and aimed his lasgun.
He saw the naked face of the tormented, wounded Blood Part soldier.
Hairless, pale, ear lobes and brows distended by the multiple piercings, the
face brutally scarred from top to bottom with thick folds of rouched tissue.
The blast had not done that. The Blood Part’s heinous initiation rituals had
made those fearful, lifetime marks.
“Feth!” Milo gasped, and fired. The red-armoured figure buckled and fell.
His screaming ceased.
“Colonel?” Chiria called anxiously, getting to her feet and pulling Nehn up
after her.
Corbec was on his face on the walkway. His makeshift ploy with the
launcher had ignored one crucial detail. The revetment had been right behind
him when he fired and the huge exhaust kick of the tube had had nowhere to
vent. The force had thrown Corbec forward five metres like a hammer blow.
He’d made an even bigger balls-up of using a tread fether than Kazel had
done a few hours before.
“Colm? Colm!” Bonin cried, running to him.
“Bruised and battered, Corbec rolled over on to his back, giggling-Teach
me to be fething spontaneous,” he sniggered.
There was a loud explosion from the other side of the revetment wall.
Dragging Corbec to his feet and leaving Nehn to finish Guthrie’s dressing,
Milo, Bonin and China hurried to the nearest gap.
The Vanquisher Wild One was dead. It was hard to tell what had done the
work. The remaining Reavers and the AT83 were throttling back down the
Principal, the stalk-tanks clattering away behind them.
Emboldened by the sight of a Leman Russ burning, the Brigand stirred
forward again, and hammered a shot at the Access Denied that crushed its
front bracings and fore-hull plating. By now, the roadway was punctured in
dozens of places by deep shell craters.
“Feth all that,” Corbec declared, still woozy, “load me up, somebody.” He
had picked up the Blood Pact rocket launcher again.
“Come on, now I know how the fething thing works…”
Chiria ran to the fallen satchel of shell spares and came back with one.
With some discussion, the four of them figured out how to slot it into place,
lock it in, prime it and arm the launcher.
This time, Corbec checked there was plenty of venting room behind him.
“Stand well back,” he told them. “I’ve heard that’s the smart move with these
things.”
Bonin, Milo and Chiria backed right off, laughing despite the tension of the
moment.
Corbec got down on one knee and rested the weight of the snout-heavy
launcher on his right shoulder. The scope was an open sight, just a wire cross
inside a metal bracket. He settled the centre of the sight against the junction
between turret and hull on the AT83, then lowered this estimate by a few
centimetres. Recent experience had taught him Blood Pact launchers pulled
up like a fething bastard when fired.
“Ease!”
The RPG shot across the highway and hit the 83 in the side turret plates.
The tank shook, but came no closer to death. It rapidly traversed its main gun
towards Corbec’s position.
“Not good…” Corbec admitted, starting to run.
But the distraction had given the Demands a good shot at the 83’s throat. It
fired, main-load AT, and took the big tread’s turret off with the precision of a
ceremonial guillotine.
The Access and the Demands stood their ground now on the ruined
highway, whipping shells at the rapidly retreating Reavers and stalk-tanks. A
pall of fuel-oil burn smoke and fyceline discharge hung over the area.
“One, this is two,” Corbec voxed.
“Two, you’re clear.”
“The assault here is over, boss. We’ve turned them back and—”
Corbec broke off.
“Repeat, two. Repeat, two. Transmission interrupted.”
“Ibram? Corbec. I’m still here. Forget what I just said. The bastards just
got serious.”
The reversing enemy tanks, now two hundred metres back down Principal
III, were pulling over to the edges of the highway to allow something to pass.
It came up monstrously fast too fast it seemed, for something so huge.
Access Denied and Demands With Menaces started to retreat rapidly,
slamming into full reverse. A huge shell impact ripped the Demands apart
catastrophically, spraying armour parts into the air on the hard tide of an
expanding fireball.
Coming down the highway towards them was a Baneblade super-heavy
war tank. All three hundred and sixteen tonnes of it were painted bright
crimson, even the drive wheels and tracks, and foul symbols were inscribed
along the massive hull.
Corbec dropped the empty launcher tube with a clatter. It had no purpose
any more. This was an entirely different scale of feth.
“Oh my bollocks,” Corbec gasped.
Just off Latinate Street Soric dropped to his knees, panting. He cursed
himself for being too old for this gak, but it didn’t take away the thumping of
his heart and the lactic acid burning in his leg muscles.
They’d had to run. His platoon and Criid’s and Raglon’s and Meryn’s. The
lingering infantry fight had suddenly turned on its head, just when they thought
they were gaining ground.
A couple of Reavers, and at least three N20 halftracks with flamer mounts
in their pulpits, had come steaming into the street fight, driving the Imperials
back. A squad of Herodian PDF had tried to counter strike, and had been
cooked and boiled for their efforts.
Running had turned into the only viable option.
Soric had tried hailing Gaunt and tac logis to call up armour cover, but the
blurting sheet-fire bursts of the enemy ’tracks seemed to be interfering with
the signal.
He crawled into a doorway, sucking air. Men ran past. Vivvo stumbled up
and collapsed next to him.
“All right, son?” Soric asked.
“I’m sorry, chief,” Vivvo replied.
“Sorry? Sorry for what?”
“For speaking about the… the thing. In front of the commissar like that.”
“Don’t you worry, son. I can look after myself.”
“I should have thought, chief. I should have realised the commissar was
there.”
Soric shrugged. “Vivvo… can I ask you a question?”
“O-of course, chief!”
“How long have you known?”
“Known what, chief?” Vivvo asked honestly.
“About me. And the messages I get.”
Vivvo frowned. “I’ve suspected it since Aexe, tell the truth. But I’ve
known since we got here.”
“Known what?”
“That the message shell keeps coming back to you with stuff in it.”
“Stuff?”
“Data. Info. The gakking truth, chief.”
Soric nodded. “You told anyone?”
“No! Well, yeah. Kazel, Venar. Maybe Hefron.”
“They all sound?”
“I think so. They wouldn’t go shooting their mouths off about—”
“About what, son?”
“About you, sir. You and what you’ve got.”
Men from Meryn’s platoon thundered past where they were hiding. Behind
them, a hundred metres down the street heavy flamers hissed.
“And what have I got son?” Soric asked.
He was expecting all sorts of answers. The hidden eye. The oracle. The
touch of the warp. The sixth sense. The psyk.
“The lucky charm,” Vivvo said. The honest simplicity of it almost brought
a tear to Soric’s eye. Milo had told him they’d called him that too. That was
the truth of things. In this dark galaxy, superstitious soldiers didn’t set up a
hue and cry for the execution of their touched ones. They regarded them as
lucky charms, touchstones, fate-wards against the entirely luck-free doom that
awaited all of Imperial culture.
“You’re not afraid of me, then?” Soric asked.
“Afraid of you? Why the gak would I be afraid of you?”
“Because of what’s in me. Because of… of the warp. A commissar, an
inquisitor… they’d have me for buttons because of what I can do.”
Vivvo blinked away dust and stared into Soric’s lined features.
“Everything you do, everything that shell tells you… it’s luck speaking to us,
giving us the edge, like with Kazel back there. I believe… really, sir… that
it’s the Emperor himself, speaking through you and looking out for us all. So
long as you give us the good stuff, chief, I’ll never question where it comes
from.”
“They’ll be on to me sooner or later, son. Best case, the black ships,
worst… a bolt-round in the head. People like me, lucky charms or not…
we’re liabilities.”
“They come for you, they’ll have to go through me first.”
Soric reached out a hand and grabbed Vivvo’s tight. “No. Promise me you
won’t get in the way when it comes. Promise me that.”
“I swear.”
“You don’t want that kind of trouble,” Soric assured him. He let go of
Vivvo’s hand. Almost at once, Vivvo grabbed Soric’s dust-caked fist.
“Promise me then, chief,” he said. “Everything the shell tells you… share
it. Act on it. If I ever find out you’ve been holding stuff back… I dunno. I
can’t threaten you, but you must know what I mean. All the while the things it
tells you are fit for general consumption, then be our lucky charm. If it tells
you shit you don’t share… well, that’s where we start running to the
commissar.”
Soric swallowed. He nodded. “Fair point. Beyond fair, son.”
“We better move, chief.” The sucking, rushing breath of the flamers was
closer now. They could both hear the clanking of the N20 tracks.
“Go!” Soric said, and Vivvo ran off down the street.
Soric tugged the message shell from his pocket and opened it.
What about it, Agun? Vivvo’s right… and very forgiving too. You want to
see him shot? Him and Kazel and Hefron and everyone else who knows?
Shot for harbouring a piece of warp-filth? You’re not telling everything.
You’re betraying them. Be a man. Tell Gaunt. Tell Gaunt about the nine.
“Nine? What nine are you talking about?” Soric raised the empty shellcase
and yelled the words into its hollow body.
“Nine what?”
But the N20 was too close now. Soric ran.
“More armour! I said we need more armour!” Gaunt yelled into the vox-horn,
but nothing except static-chopped distortion caterwauled back.
“What’s wrong with this thing?” he barked at Beltayn. The signals officer
was trying to tune the dial of his voxcaster.
“Something’s awry, sir,” he said, too busy concentrating on his job to form
a proper reply.
“What?”
“Jamming, most like. Heavy-grade electroference.”
Gaunt had feared as much. The invaders were adding to their advantages
by muzzling the Imperial comms and chain of command. They were probably
fething up their own vox-links too, but no doubt the Blood Pact was relying
on psykers to coordinate their forces.
“Pack that up and round up the platoon here,” Gaunt told Beltayn, and then
ran off down the dusty street. The air was fall of the sounds of combat from
the thoroughfares all around. “Rawne!” he yelled. “Rawne!”
Rawne’s platoon was holding the end of the narrow street where it joined
Tesk Hill Square. The small-arms exchange was fierce. Gaunt saw Feygor in
cover behind a garbage drum, snapping off shots. He came up behind him,
head low.
“Feygor!”
Feygor glanced round. “Little busy, sir.”
“Where’s Rawne?”
Feygor shrugged. “Micro-bead’s down.”
“All vox is down. Where’s Rawne?”
“Last I saw, up in that hab block. Third floor.”
Gaunt nodded and sprinted across the debris-littered road to the side door
of the hab. A decent kick or two had taken it off its hinges. He went inside.
The unlit stairwell within led up to all nine of the hab’s levels. There was
a scrappy notice panel screwed to the wall facing the door that listed the
names of the occupant families next to their hab module numbers.
Gaunt ran up the stairs two at a time, drawing his laspistol. Fething thing
seemed lightweight and inconsequential next to the solid memory of his lost
bolt pistol.
He didn’t bother with the first two floors, and went into the third level
through the spring-latched entry.
“Rawne?”
A long hallway stretched out before him, scattered with scraps of paper
and discarded clothes. On either side, numbered doors identified the separate
hab modules. Some were open, and despite the fact the phospha lamps were
dead in their brackets, the hall was filled with thin daylight from the open
rooms.
“Rawne?”
Nothing but the rattle and slam of fighting down below.
He stepped into one open module. It was a mess. Furniture was
overturned, and shelves cleared. Tape had been put in an X over the main
window in the vain hope that it would protect the glass from blast damage.
Whoever lived here had left in a hurry. Gaunt hoped they were tucked up
safely in a Civitas shelter now.
He crossed to the window, keeping out of sight, and took a look. Gunfire
was being exchanged savagely across the open space of Tesk Hill Square
below. There were shell holes in the paving, and a five storey building on the
far side of the square was on fire. The massive atmosphere processor in the
centre of the open space was dented and budded by countless stray shots.
Several bodies lay out in the open. Most, Gaunt noted with satisfaction, were
dad in dirty red.
From his vantage point, Gaunt could see a good way west across the
northern sectors of the Civitas. Huge banks of firesmoke were puffing up
from the Ironhall sector. Last he’d heard, before the vox went to feth, was
that Kaldenbach’s line of defence was taking the worst of it. He hoped to
Terra that Kaldenbach was following GAR 3 too. Kaldenbach, so cocksure
and confident of his own abilities, had strategic ideas of his own. It would be
just like him to ignore Biagi’s fine prep-work and choreograph his own fight.
If he did, they’d all pay.
Further off, in the smoggy distance, he saw that enemy landers were still
dipping in over the obsidaes. The downpour of drop-pods had all but ceased,
but the landers still came on, ferrying men and munitions down, retreating
empty, refuelling and repeating the process.
Gaunt had, for obvious reasons, a basic faith in the Guard being the
backbone of the Imperium’s fighting power. He had a healthy respect for the
Astartes, for the Titan Legions, for the armoured regiments and the Navy, but
the basic fething infantry was, in his book, the four square basis of victory.
That’s the way he’d been taught, after all, by his father, by Oktar, by
Slaydo… even by Dercius. But right then, like never before, he longed for a
squadron of Furies, or Lightnings, or anything air-mobile with a good rate of
climb and armour-penetrator ammunition. Those landers were so vulnerable.
One well led squadron could exterminate a huge chunk of the enemy strength
in transit before it had even made surface-touch. It would be like a gamebird
shoot.
He left the module and tried the next few. “Rawne?” he called as he went.
Most of the hab flats were like the first one he’d entered — abandoned and
untidy. He tried one where the door was locked, and came into a module that
was completely empty except for a console table placed oddly in the middle
of the floor. There was a book on it. The walls of the room were stripped
bare, and there was no carpet or matting, just bare boards. Even the single
phospha overhead was missing its shade.
He paused for a moment. It was very odd. There was a door — closed —
off to the left. Why was this room so empty?
He took a step forward, and then heard the distinctive crack of a hot-shot
load from nearby.
He hustled out into the hallway again, and went down five more doors into
another scruffy module.
As he came through the doorway, Banda swung round from the window
and aimed her long-las at him. The target light from her scope glowed on his
solar plexus.
“Sir!” she said, putting up her weapon.
“Sorry to spook you, Banda. Where’s Rawne?”
“Right here,” said Rawne, behind him.
Gaunt turned.
“Looking for me?”
“What are you doing up here?”
“Link’s down, so I was trying to get a better picture of what was going on
by eyeball. Bastards have us locked. I was looking for an opening.”
Gaunt nodded. “There’s bad feth going down at Principal III.”
“Corbec?”
“Something about a super-heavy tank. I think that’s where the emphasis is
switching. This…” Gaunt gestured towards the window and the fighting
immediately outside. “This is just a holding pattern.”
Rawne shrugged. “Tell that to my Ghosts.”
“Look, I’m taking my squad, and Mailer’s and Raglon’s, and we’re going
to head east to see if we can help Corbec. That means you’re in charge of this
area. Okay?”
“Of course.”
“You’ve got GAR 3?”
Rawne patted the data-slate in his jacket pocket.
“Use it, Elim. We’ve got no vox to communicate with, but we can hold this
together if we’re all singing from the same sheet. Here and Latinate are the
hold points. Failing that, back to Armonsfahl Boulevard.”
“Latinate may already be gone. A runner came through from Soric. Hard
push by flamer ’tracks.”
“Armonsfahl then. Send your own runner and get Soric back into the game.
Get him to group the platoons with him and—”
Gaunt stopped.
“You know how to run a defence, don’t you?”
Rawne shrugged slightly.
“I’m wasting my breath, aren’t I?”
Rawne nodded.
“The Emperor protects,” Gaunt said, giving Rawne a quick salute and
hurrying out and away down the hall.
“Gaunt?”
He paused at the sound of Rawne’s voice, and turned. Rawne stood in the
module’s doorway, looking back at him.
“Yeah?”
“Good luck hunting that super-heavy. Give it feth. Give ’em all feth.”
Gaunt nodded, and hit the stairs.
The spring door banged shut after him. Rawne wandered back into the
module. At the window, Banda was lining up her long-las.
“What’s—”
“Shhh,” she said. “I’m working. Second floor window. Blood Pact officer
with a rocket launcher. Thinks that noooo-body can see him…”
Her voice was just a soft hiss. Her breathing dropped to a very low rate.
The long-las bucked hard as it fired.
“Got him?” Rawne asked.
She turned and smiled sardonically at him. “What do you think?”
He leaned forward and kissed her mouth. It was a brief but hungry kiss.
“You know what I think,” he said, moving back. “Kill something else for
me.”
“Like what? I could run to a side window and get a decent angle on Gaunt
as he ponces off.”
Rawne smiled, and shook his head. “Thanks, but no. Either the archenemy
gets him or I do. No favours.”
She shrugged, and slapped in a new clip.
“I appreciate the thought though,” Rawne added.
“Ah, I couldn’t anyway. Gaunt’s all right. I like him.”
She saw the look in his eyes and added sweetly, “Not like I like you,
naturally.”
“Naturally.”
“So,” Banda said, lining up and scoping for a new shot “You’re in charge
now. What’s the plan?”
“We keep killing them until they’re all dead… or we are. Or was that a
trick question?”
“Everyone set?” Gaunt asked. There was a general assent. “Let’s move,” he
told them.
With his own platoon, and Nailer’s and Raglon’s, Gaunt set off away from
Tesk Hill, into the middle streets of the Masonae District. The scouts moved
ahead — Caober, Mkeller and Preed. Preed was Suth’s replacement in
seventeen. An older Tanith, he’d steadfastly remained a regular trooper until
Mkoll had urged him to specialise. In his previous life as a gamekeeper, he’d
developed great woodcraft, but he’d not joined the scout fraternity because
of a lack of confidence. He thought himself too old. Gaunt hoped Preed was
not finding his true calling too late.
Half a kilometre east of Tesk Hill, they ran into trouble. A serious wedge
of Blood Pact infantry was biting down around Hisson Street, trying to break
through to Principal III. The platoons commanded by Skerral, Folore,
Mkendrick and Burone — respectively nineteen, twenty-six, eighteen and
seven — were packing a splendid but tight resistance to that attack. But the
neighbourhood streets were no go.
“Suggestions?” Gaunt asked.
“We go through those buildings there,” Caober said firmly. Haller nodded.
Caober consulted his data-slate chart. “Cut through them and we should come
out on Fancible Street, clear of this mess.”
The buildings were a manufactory and a hab block. They had been bolted
tight and secure by their departing owners. Mkeller las-knifed the padlock on
the manufactory’s outer door.
“What?” Haller asked Gaunt.
“Let’s go careful. If this is the way through, then you can bet the enemy
will have thought of it too.”
“Coming the other way, you reckon?” asked the tall Veighast.
“I think so,” said Gaunt.
The interior of the manufactory was cold and dark. Generally, the air in the
Masonae District had become increasingly stale, so much so that many of the
Ghosts were wearing their rebreathers. Too many atmosphere processors
knocked out of action, Gaunt thought.
The machine shops and assembly sheds were quiet. As they moved along,
they checked every side door and storeroom, just in case.
They exited the manufactory and crossed via a covered walkway into the
worker habitat. The procedure resumed. A careful checking of rooms to
cover their backs as they crossed the hab’s lower halls.
“This one’s locked,” Caober said.
Gaunt approached, the Ghosts behind him down in cover, weapons raised.
He turned the door handle.
“No, it’s not.”
Caober furrowed his brow in surprise.
Gaunt threw the door open and they looked in, guns aimed. Another hab
module, standard, except…
.. this one was entirely bare. No carpet or rugs, no shade on the overhead
lamp, walls stripped. A door to one side, closed. A console table drawn up
in the centre of the floor, with a book on it.
“Clear!” said Caober. “Move forward…”
“Wait!” Gaunt hissed. He had a terribly uneasy feeling. He walked into the
bare room, and smelt its musty cool. What was going on? Some kind of
coincidence?
He walked to the small table oddly set in the centre of the room, and
reached out to the book lying there. It was old. So very old, it was falling
apart and dissolving into dust.
He opened the cover and read the title page.
It was a first edition of On The Use of Armies by Marchese.
Gaunt had his own copy of this obscure work. Tactician Biota had given it
to him just before he’d left Aexe Cardinal.
What the hell…? What gross coincidence was this? Gaunt felt a rising
sense of panic and fear. Warp magic was around him. He looked at the closed
side door. What was beyond that? What?
He stepped towards it, and turned the handle. The door opened gently.
Gaunt smelled fresh, clean air. There were plants in the doorway. Climbers
and shrubs. This side room was obviously some kind of indoor herbarium, an
agri-room for—
“Hostiles!” Caober yelled from the doorway, and started to fire.
Gaunt slammed the door shut and ran to join him.
A Blood Pact platoon was coming to meet them down the hab hallway,
using doorways for cover and firing their lasrifles and solid-slug weapons.
It took ten minutes of brutal fighting to kill them.
By the time the fight was over, Gaunt was at the east exit of the hab. He
thought for a second about going back to that strange, bare room, but it didn’t
seem to matter so much anymore. His blood was up. He’d just impaled a
Blood Pact officer on his power sword. And by the time the three platoon
group was out and into Fancible Street, he’d forgotten entirely about the old
book and the bare room.
Gol Kolea dropped down out of the hab window onto the slip-road beneath
and ran forty metres, fast, towards the rear wall of the dingy store-barn
facing him. Every black, glass-less window along the road staring down on
him seemed to hold the threat of hidden shooters, but no fire came his way.
He was breathing hard by the time he crunched against the gritty wall and
slid down, but he could still hear the clattering rattle of a belt-fed weapon
nearby.
DaFelbe was trying to raise him on the vox, demanding to know his
position. The link was very bad, very chopped. Kolea could only just make
DaFelbe out. Kolea flicked the mic of his comm-link twice in quick
succession, the nonverbal acknowledgement, the can’t talk now.
He crawled to the end of the store-barn’s retaining wall and then quickly
swung up over the low barrier, firing from the chest. Two Blood Pact
troopers, their backs to him at the next wall line, toppled over, taken
completely by surprise.
He ducked back down. More belt-fed rattling. Some shouting now. A
couple of shots whined over him.
Chancing it, he took a dash towards the looming doorway of the barn and
threw himself into cover. Renewed shouts, in a harsh language that made him
cringe.
He worked his way down the inside wall in the gloom, up onto a loading
dock, and across to a shell hole in the wall. The fractured puncture gave him
a view out into the freight yard behind the barn. From there, he could see the
two-man team with the belt-fed cannon, nestled behind a stack of prefab
rockcrete sheets. He could see them, but the firing angle was lousy.
He needed to be higher…
A metal ladder, secured to the wall on brackets, led up from the loading
dock to a first floor stowage platform. Slinging his lasgun over his shoulder,
he went up the ladder.
He was just climbing off onto the stowage decking when he realised he
wasn’t alone. He threw himself forward as the figure came for him out of the
dark, and they tumbled over together, grunting and thrashing. His opponent
was quick, and Kolea got a warning glimpse of a bared blade. A flash of
steel in the dimness. Gak to that. Kolea put all his upper body strength into a
hooking punch and slammed the figure away onto its back.
He darted forward to finish the business scratch-company style, with his
bare hands, and pulled up.
It was Cuu.
Cuu was writhing on the deck, cursing and clutching his bloody mouth.
“You!” Cuu hissed.
Kolea shrugged. “Didn’t you recognise me?”
Cuu shook his head. “Thought you were one of them…”
That, disturbingly, didn’t ring true to Kolea at all. Cuu had been up on the
platform before Kolea, so his eyes would have had longer to adjust to the
gloom. Surely, he should have been able to tell…
Unless he’d chosen not to. A quick slash with a warknife, and who’d have
known better?
Kolea shook himself. Lijah Cuu was a scumbag, but he wasn’t that much of
a scumbag…
“Get up,” said Kolea. As Cuu rose, oathing and hawking bloody phlegm,
Kolea crossed to the ventilator window in the wall, levered open the metal
louvres, and looked out. Down below, at a steeper but better angle, he saw
the gun-nest. He slid the barrel of his lasrifle through the louvres and took
aim, even though he was going to fire on auto.
His shots rained down over the gun-position. The gunner himself flopped
back dead at once. His loader turned, twitched as he was winged, and
walloped over onto his back.
“The cannon’s dead. Way’s clear,” Kolea voxed to DaFelbe, hoping that
the essence of his message would get through the fierce interference.
He turned to Cuu. “Come on,” he said.
The platoon was moving up through the freight yard when they got down.
“Did I do that?” Criid asked Cuu as she brushed past him, glancing at his
bloodied nose and mouth.
“No, sarge.”
She shrugged. “Must be losing my touch.” Criid clicked her fingers and
pointed, and Hwlan took the point men forward.
“Nice work,” Criid told Kolea with a smile. He nodded. He was still
getting used to the odd looks his old friends and comrades were giving him,
but there was something particular about Criid’s manner. She’d been fine at
first but now there was a wary reserve What was that about?
“Criid okay?” he asked Lubba.
Lubba was adjusting the feeder pipe of his flamer’s P-tanks. “Sure. Why?”
“Keeps looking at me.”
“Probably thinks your gonna get your rank back off her.”
Kolea shook his head. “I told her…”
“She’s gonna worry. That’s all it is.”
“Flamer here!” Criid’s order echoed down the concourse. They hurried to
join her.
It was a false alarm. Vari’s platoon was coming in from the next street
over. Baen, Vari’s scout, had picked up an enemy grouping at the nearby
crossroads.
“About thirty of them,” Baen reported. “And they seem to have a stalktank…
but it’s not active.”
“Not active?” Criid asked.
Baen hunched his shoulders in a ‘what can I tell you?’ gesture “Looks like
they’re guarding it.”
“We set up a holding fire here to keep ’em busy,” Varl proposed, “then we
could sneak a fire-team round the side. Through there—” he pointed.
“I’ll take it,” said Kolea. Criid looked at him. Again, that strange tension.
“Fine by me,” Varl grinned. He’d missed his old sparring partner Kolea.
“So long as you don’t feth it up.”
“Okay,” Criid said, reluctantly. “Nessa, Hwlan, Baen… with Kolea.”
The four of them ran off to the left into the twilight of a narrow, tall
sidestreet as the combined platoons laid in. Kolea could hear the crackle of
las-arms and the hiss of flamers.
The scouts led the way, followed by Nessa with her long-las. Kolea
brought up the back. There were worse places to be in the galaxy than
directly behind Nessa Bourah when she ran, he considered.
A sort of realisation hit him. He felt — at a gentle, normal, human level —
desire. Appreciation of a sexy female’s well-made backside. Gak, but it had
been a long, long time since he’d registered anything like that.
Since he’d registered anything like anything.
It really did feel like this was the first day of his life and he was seeing
everything new. Like he’d woken up from a deep, numb slumber. How had he
described it to Curth? like surfacing from deep water.
I’m alive again, he thought. Thanks be the Beati.
Baen and Hwlan led them off the street, through the cluttered, ransacked
ground floor classrooms of a hab-district scholam, and up onto the first floor
of a Munitorum laundry. The air was stale and damp from the water
stagnating in the big steel wash-presses. Vermin gnawed and scurried in the
mounds of wet overalls. Soap crystals littered the floorboards and lint
clogged the grilles of the overhead ducts.
They reached a row of windows that a shell fall had blown in. The stalktank
was below them, crouching against the side wall of a suburban chapel.
Baen had been right — the enemy troopers down there were holding the
street as if defending the machine.
Nessa took a look through her scope.
Something’s not right, she signed.
“May I?” Kolea asked. Nessa handed him her long-las.
He spotted down, letting the auto-settings of the scope adjust to his
eyeball.
The stalk-tank wasn’t standard. It was lacking weapon pods and foreturrets.
Instead, its underslung body compartments were fat and distended,
like a swollen belly. Within the gross, glassteel bubble, Kolea could see a
human figure in front of the driver. The figure was leaning back, twitching
and spasming. Hundreds of plug-wires snaked from its body into the guts of
the tank’s body assembly.
“Psyker,” he said, handing the long-las back to Nessa.
“Psyk-weapon?” Hwlan asked.
“No,” said Kolea. “I reckon it’s that… and things like it… that are fething
up our comm-links.”
Do the honours, Baen signed to Nessa.
She took aim, her breathing slowing. She fired.
The hot-shot round ruptured the belly-bubble and blew the psyker’s head
and shoulders into meat shrapnel. The stalk-tank itself shuddered and then
started to burn. A nonverbal scream shrilled into the air and made them all
recoil and gasp.
Kolea, Baen and Hwlan got back up to the window and began firing down
on the rapidly breaking Blood Pact units. Criid and Varl took advantage of
the confusion and pressed in.
In under five minutes, they had the street cleared.
The crimson Baneblade was a horrifying thing, terror made into physical
form. Corbec doubted the fething Archon himself, Urlock wassissname,
would have more presence in person.
The sound it made was enough. Not a growl, not a rumble, not a roar. A
profoundly deep, almost infrasonic howl that vibrated the diaphragm and
narrowed the soul. Someone — Daur maybe, or Ana Curth — had once told
Corbec that infra-sound noise, down around the 18Hz level, triggered a
primaeval fear-response in humans. It was as old as caves and darkness and
the first fire The infrasonic rumble in the snarls of Old Terra hunter-fields
made humans freeze with terror. It was a base response, inherited from the
primates.
When it fired its main gun, or its hull-mounted Demolisher cannon, it was
worse. The ground quaked. Shells seared away into the mid-city and
fireballs bloomed up over the roofline. There was nothing he could do
against that. Nothing any lone human could do.
“Come on! Come on!” Milo was dragging at his sleeve desperately. His
assault team was ready to flee into the eastern streets. The Baneblade
crunched over the mangled wreck of the Demands With Menaces.
“Okay!” Corbec started, and struggled to his feet.
“What the gak is that?” China asked.
Corbec turned to look.
A figure was striding out onto the highway in front of the super-heavy tank.
She was dad in golden armour and a sword glittered in her hand.
NINE
THE JOURNEY INTO NIGHT
“Stand with me, for as long as you are able.
A day, a week, a year, a minute. Whatever you can give,
however long you can stand, I welcome that.”
—Sabbat, epistles
It was her.
“Oh, feth me! The Beati!” Corbec whispered.
Milo stared. He had not yet got over the shock of the pilgrim girl’s death.
He could see her still, in his mind’s eye, running out in front of the tank,
waving her arms to distract it. This seemed too much like history repeating
itself.
“Brin!” Corbec yelled, but Milo was already running out of cover.
“You’ll be the death of me, boy!” Corbec added, as he shook off Chiria’s
hands and went after him.
Milo ran out onto the highway. The Beati didn’t seem to see him. God-
Emperor, but she looked so beautiful in her gilded, engraved armour.
He cried out. A second later, Corbec crashed into him and brought him
down with a flying tackle. They both bruised hard on the road surface.
The Baneblade’s coaxial sub-weapons swung to target the golden figure
ahead of it and blazed away, but the Saint was no longer there. The vacant
stretch of roadway ripped up in a messy blitz.
With a single leap, she had come up onto the fore-hull of the huge vehicle,
behind the squat Demolisher mount and beside the main weapon. Her sword
scythed in her hand.
The massive main barrel severed, the cut length of it crashing onto the hull
before rolling off onto the ground. The sliced edges of the barrel stump
crackled with discharging blue energy.
“Dear God-Emperor…” Corbec stammered in disbelief.
The Beati swung her sword up, grabbed the hilt with both hands and
plunged it down, blade-first, between her well-planted feet, deep into the
body of the tank’s main hull.
It slewed to a stop. She had pin-pointed and executed the driver.
The top-hatch popped and a crew commander scrambled up, grabbing the
yokes of the pintle-mounted bolter. She leapt again, somersaulting, and
landed on her feet on the turret-top behind his hatch. Her purring blade cut
through neck and pintle mount alike.
“Corbec… Corbec, did you see…?” Milo gasped, watching.
“The Emperor surely protects, lad,” muttered Corbec.
The Beati unclasped a golden tube-charge from her belt, thumbed off the
spring and dropped it down into the open hatch. Then she dived headlong off
the top of the tank.
Milo and Corbec started running for cover.
The Baneblade did not explode, but fire gusted through its heart, and blew
off several hatches. One crewman staggered out, burning, and fell onto the
highway.
Sword hanging low from her right hand, the Beati walked towards them,
gleaming in her armour, backlit by the burning tank.
Milo and Corbec turned to face her.
“Well met, brothers,” she said.
They both found themselves smiling.
“That was astonishing. Holiness,” Milo said.
“Holiness?” she admonished. “Is that how you greet a friend? I am Sabbat.
Call me that if you must call me anything.”
Corbec glanced at Milo. He was amazed. The boy really didn’t see it. This
was Sanian, a girl Milo had spent years dreaming about. But he didn’t
recognise her, face to face.
But, when he came to think of it, Corbec realised he wouldn’t have
recognised her either. He only knew it was Sanian because Gaunt had told
him so. This woman, this creature, was nothing like the esholi he’d met on
Hagia. Sanian had been quiet, modest, restrained. This female blazed with
confidence, power and drive.
And, while Sanian had been a treat for the eyes, the woman before them
was beautiful. So beautiful it hurt. She was luminous. Beyond sex, beyond
desire. A divine incarnation of beauty.
And she’d just killed a super-heavy tank outright in single combat.
Corbec suddenly felt awkward and pathetic.
“Nothing like the feats of valour you’ve performed in your time, Colm,”
she said to him, as if reading his thoughts.
“You’re too kind,” he mumbled.
Milo started to say something and then brought his lasrifle up rapidly,
aiming — so it appeared — right at her head.
He fired, and the shot went over her left shoulder. The Baneblade
crewman, bolt pistol raised, was half-out of the dead tank’s side hatch, his
weapon levelled at the Beati’s back. Milo’s shot hit him in the throat and he
fell down on his face, the gun clattering to the deck.
The Beati flinched and looked round. When she turned back to look at
Milo, she was smiling broadly.
“You see?” she said. “You see? Without you, I am nothing. The Emperor,
blessed be His divine grace, has given me strength and speed and power
beyond the scope of man. But I can’t fight the enemy alone. Alone, I will be
overwhelmed. To live, and to be victorious, I rely on you… on you, Milo,
and you Colm, on the brave men and women of the Imperial Guard, on all my
fellow warriors… a fact that Milo has just demonstrated very clearly.”
“We only serve, Beati,” mumbled Corbec.
“We all only serve, Colm,” she assured him, placing her hand on his
forehead. A raging headache he had not even begun to acknowledge, the
after-effects of the Baneblade’s awful infrasound, faded and vanished. He
felt good. Feth! He felt twenty-one again!
“All of us, together, on the journey into night. I may be something…
something… I don’t know what. A figurehead, at least. A rallying point. A
leader. But I am nothing without you. A leader is nothing if she has no one to
lead.”
She looked at them both.
“Do you understand? I feel like I’m rambling…”
“N-no!” Corbec assured her.
“We understand,” said Milo.
“This is not about me,” she said. “This is about all of us. Imperial souls,
banding together to see off the dark.”
“We understand,” Milo repeated. She turned to look at him and smiled
again.
“I knew you would, Milo. It is set, as a fact, in the warp. You will stay
with me now. Now, until this is done. You will protect me. Gaunt has
promised as much.”
“I will, lady,” Milo said.
“You’re not scared, are you?” she asked.
He shook his head.
“I would be,” she told him.
Gaunt and his force arrived on Principal III a few minutes later. Gaunt stared
in amazement at the ruined super-heavy.
“What happened?” he asked.
“The Beati happened,” Corbec said.
“Where is she now?”
“Advancing. Domor’s platoon went with her. Milo too.”
“Milo?”
“Looked to me like he’d been seconded. As her personal sidekick.”
Gaunt frowned. “You look tired,” he said to Corbec.
“Been a long day, sir.”
And it would be longer, and without end. The Imperials had barely held
back the archenemy’s first wave, and the second was coming hard on its
heels. There would be no break in this fight The enemy would assault the
Civitas until it fell.
“I’ve called for reinforcements,” Gaunt told his colonel. “I want set units
to drop back and refresh. Make yours one of them.”
“We’re fine, sir,” Corbec protested.
“I know. But retire anyway. Soric’s falling back, Haller, Burone, Ewler,
Scafond, Folore, Meryn. Join them, please Get your wounds patched. It’ll
make a difference tomorrow if I can pull platoons like yours fresh out of the
hat.”
“If there is a tomorrow,” Corbec sighed.
“There will be,” said Gaunt emphatically. “Now round up your platoon
and retire.”
Corbec’s platoon meandered back through empty streets towards the inner
guard stations, sandbagged emplacements manned by Regiment Civitas and
PDF along the Guild Slope.
They could all hear the fighting raging on at the city limits.
“Medic station,” said a PDF officer, pointing. Dorden and Curth had set up
shop in a vacant livestock hall. Corbec sent his injured in that direction, but
he was distracted.
He’d heard something. A sound from his past, nostalgic eddying out of a
hab across from the hall.
He walked over, and ducked into the hab. That noise! The shriek of a
woodsaw. That dusty smell, that memory…
There was a stack of seasoned timber just inside the low door. Pale stuff
with a fine bloom. Corbec ran his fingers along the grain. He’d forgotten how
much the smell and feel of wood had been part of his life. A part of every
Tanith’s life.
“Help you, trooper?”
Corbec turned and peered into the dark interior of the building. An old
man with sawdust flakes in his wiry hair was feeding planks into a table saw
beneath the light of a single phospha lamp.
“Just… didn’t expect to find a place like this here,” Corbec shrugged. The
old man frowned as if he didn’t know what to say to that, and hefted up
another board in his gloved hands. The saw whined.
“Colm Corbec,” Corbec nodded to the old man, holding out his hand. The
man finished his cut, then set the wood aside, and removed a glove to shake
Corbec’s hand.
“Gufrrey Wyze. Sure I can’t help you?”
Corbec scratched his head, looking around. “I used to work in a place like
this. My father ran a machine shop back home, but he did a lot of timber
cutting too. It was timber country.”
Wyze nodded. “Where was that?”
“Tanith.”
Wyze thought for a moment then said a single word that shocked Corbec.
“Nalwood.”
“You know it?”
“Of course,” said the old man. He hit the rubber-sleeved switch on the
side of the table saw and powered it down so they could talk without raising
their voices.
“You know it?” Corbec repeated.
“You see many forests here on Herodor? Plantations? Sustainable
woodstocks? We import from all over. People like wood. It’s reassuring.
And it’s versatile too. Furniture, frames, panels, whatever.”
He wiggled a finger at Corbec, beckoning him towards a side door
between laden shelves of tools, pots and junk. Beyond was the wood store. A
great mass of timber was seasoning there, in floor-to-ceiling open shelves,
divided by aisle gangways. The air smelled of resin and heart-wood.
“All imported,” said Wyze. “Most of it’s coloci and sap-maple and white
toft from Khan, cheap stuff. Everyday. But I sometimes get shipments of
choicer grades. There, that’s half-cut supple pine from Estima. You ever see
better?”
“It’s nice,” agreed Corbec, stroking the velvet surface of the exposed pile
top.
“And this is mature shiln from Brunce I’ve got some genuine Helican
spruce somewhere.”
Wyze walked down the nearest aisle and bent down to a low shelf. He tore
some pulp-paper freight wrapping away from a small consignment of dark
wood. It was dusty. It hadn’t been touched in a while.
“Here you go. Thought I had some left. Only use it for special jobs.”
Corbec bent down beside him and knew immediately what he was looking
at. He swallowed hard.
“Nalwood.”
“That’s right. Beautiful stuff. Costs too.”
“I know it,” Corbec said. Quality timber had been Tanith’s one major
export. He’d worked the mills himself, years back, rough cutting wood for
off-world shipment.
“Can’t remember what I paid. Must be a while back now, but when I saw
what the merchant had, I didn’t argue about the price. This stuff is worth the
outlay.”
Corbec reached down. The shipment’s paper wrapper had the vestiges of a
merchant’s excise ticket pasted to it. He read off the fading shipping date. It
was fifteen years old.
“I’ve been thinking about ordering some more,” Wyze said.
Corbec sighed. “You can’t get it anymore,” he said. “The supply’s run
out.”
“Well, that’s a shame,” said the old man.
“Indeed it is.” Corbec could scarcely credit what he was seeing. He —
and every other man of Tanith — had assumed that every last part of their
world was dead, except for them and the stuff they’d taken off world with
them. But here was a piece of Tanith that had survived, spared from the fires.
How many other small relics remained, in woodshops and carpenter’s stores
across the sector?
And how fething right it seemed for it to have found its way here with
them. Gaunt believed that fate had bound them to Herodor, that some great
invisible process of coincidence and cosmic synchronicity had tied them to
this place and time. And here was the proof of it.
“I was wondering…” Corbec began.
“What?”
“I was wondering what you were doing here. I mean, with the invasion
going on. The streets are cleaned out and everyone’s pulled back to the hives.
Why are you still at work?”
“Reserved occupation,” said Wyze. “All part of the war effort.”
“Reserved? What’s the work, then?”
“Making coffins,” said Wyze. “We’re going to need a lot of them.”
Night was falling. The fierce fighting in the northern sectors of the Civitas
did not abate. It lit the darkness with its flashes and beams. Deeper into the
city heart, thousands of yellow fires flickered and glowed, the legacy of the
shelling and the constant airstrikes. Every few minutes, Locusts loomed out
of the closing darkness and streaked over the Civitas at low level, dropping
payloads or firing cannons.
Beyond, in the obsidaes, the invasion force continued to land. The belly
lamps of landers, frost white, burning in the air like flares. Rigs of phospha
lamps had been built around makeshift drop points and, under their glare, as
the cold night wind rose in the desert, armour columns assembled under
marshals, and infantry brigades formed up. The glass fields were bright with
circles of brilliance. Locust formations criss-crossed the area at speed.
Massive transports came in, raising walls of dust, and shook the soil with
their land fall. Iris valve belly hatches yawned open along their fat flanks and
they gave birth to litters of stalk-tanks. Others landed, ramp mouths open like
basking crocodilians, and lines of tracked armour, APCs, self-propelled guns
and gref-carriers spewed from them onto the dusty plain.
Overhead, the low, baleful stars of the watching enemy warships shone.
Saul, the Marksman, entered the city through the Glassworks sector. He spent
most of the first day shadowing the frontline forces as they ploughed into the
Civitas, street by street. Saul had no aversion to fighting, but assault
scrapping was not his business here on Herodor, so he preferred not to get
his hands dirty. He left the slog to the death-brigades and the armour. He
spoke to no one, for he was preparing his mind for the task the Magister had
set him, but he kept his helmet link open and listened throughout the day to the
comm-traffic of his own forces.
Occasionally, he retuned to the enemy channel. It was meant to be
encrypted, but their tech-mages had broken the Imperial cryptography in the
first few hours of the assault. Saul spoke Low Gothic fluently. He found it
useful to understand the chatter of the weak souls he preyed on. When, in the
middle part of the day, his forces had launched their jamming weapons, he’d
been frustrated to lose the Imperial signal.
It was back on again now. This pleased him, even though it meant the
enemy must have taken out at least a few of the specialist psyker vehicles.
By nightfall, he had reached the junction of Principal VI and Brazen Street.
He knew this from his chart-slate. The tech mages in the first wave had
almost literally ripped detailed street plans and schematics from the Civitas’
tac logis data banks, which were protected by laughably crude protection
programs. The information flowed from the tech-mages on the surface back to
the warships, where it was collated and transmitted back down to any one
with the appropriate field gear. That meant officers, squad leaders, tank
chiefs and Saul. A constantly updating, constantly refining picture of the city
was made available to him on his hand-held.
The Imperials had fought well on that first day, to give them their credit.
They’d held onto the Masonae and Ironhall districts, though it had cost them.
By morning, Saul was certain, it would be a different picture.
In the Glassworks, the Imperials had been broken three times during the
course of daylight, falling back on each occasion and redoubling their
resistance. Monitoring the comm lines, Saul had learned that the Glassworks
was defended in the main by local PDF and Regiment Civitas soldiers. Their
area commander was a colonel called Vibreson.
This Vibreson was doing well in a bad situation. Nightfall had his forces
stalling the Blood Pact push along Brazen Street and the Glass Road hab
estates. The death-brigade units Saul had been shadowing all day were now
dug in and stationary.
That didn’t suit Saul at all. He needed to get on, deeper into the city, where
his goal awaited him. He realised the time had come to make an opening for
himself.
The Marksman sat down on a kerb beside a torched hab, just a few
hundred metres from the fierce front of the fight, and took out his chart. He
scrolled the specific map reference onto the little screen and studied it as he
listened to the enemy’s channel.
Blood Pact units moved up past him, and he ignored them. The night was
coming down, and that was his hour, a time to capitalise on shadows and
move forward. Night could get him within rifle-range of the target, and then
he could simply wait, still and silent like just another corpse, until the
moment came.
Saul switched channels and listened for a while to his own side’s chatter.
Officers, using the name of the Magister as a threat and a promise, were
screaming for more armour to push up into the Brazen Street defences and
crack them. Saul smiled. That was no good. The Imperials were too well
established. Their line would hold for a good time yet.
It would hold against force, that was. Against physical attack.
But Saul had murderous experience of war. Their line would not hold
against fear and confusion. Not for a moment. Fear and confusion would do
in a minute what it would take a full motor division a day to accomplish.
He flicked back to the Imperial channel. He listened for the word
“Drumroll”. The Imperials —those poor fools — so loved their code names.
They thought they were so clever. They never mentioned Vibreson in person,
but that was what “Drumroll” meant. Drumroll was needed at Casten Street.
Drumroll was moving with twelve platoon up to Ravenor Crossing. Would
Drumroll approve the repositioning of PDF eleven to the Sespre Aqueduct?
Idiots. It was like a child’s game, trying to hide the truth from adults. That
was always the Imperial failing. They regarded the armies of the warp as
scum, so they also assumed they were stupid.
Where was Drumroll now?
“Drumroll, this is Sentry. Respond.”
“Sentry, go. Situation?”
“Taking heavy fire now, major fire. Junction of Brazen and Filipi. Request
support.”
“Hang tight, Sentry. Switching rolling one and rolling two to your position
in five. Got a shit-storm here on VI. Chapel of Kiodrus under heavy,
sustained.”
“Read that Drumroll. Can you deal?”
“Stand by.”
Saul looked at his slate. He took off his right glove and traced the line of
Principal VI with a scar-disfigured middle finger. He kept his right index
finger curled protectively against his palm. It was the only part of his hands
that was not ritual-scarred. It was his trigger finger, after all.
The Chapel of Kiodrus. There it was. A temple raised to the memory of
some half-arsed commander who had stood with the Saint in the early times.
Apparently, that made him a big deal.
Saul got to his feet and tucked his slate in his thigh pouch. He put his glove
back on and picked up his long-las.
It took him twenty minutes to skirt round the back of the habs, avoiding his
own forces as much as the enemy, before he came out onto Principal VI.
He could see the chapel, a tall, dignified place raised from ashlar. Its
facade was dented with shell holes. Las crossfire whipped across the
roadway in front of it. Smoke hazed the early night air.
Saul crossed to a hab on the other side of the wide avenue, keeping low,
and knocked the entry door off its hinges with a single kick. The building was
dirty and stale. The stench of decomposing food wafted from the shared
larders on each block level.
The Marksman went up five flights and broke into a hab apartment. A
glance told him the window view wasn’t quite right, so he went back out and
up another floor.
Better.
He slid the window up and braced it with a leg he snapped off a chair.
Then he lined up.
Saul fired up his scope. It whirred and blinked, then the image resolved. In
green and black, light-boosted, high res. He panned around. The front of the
chapel. The side. The alley beside it. The barricades. Now he got winks of
brilliant light Las-fire. The muzzle flash of several cannons. He adjusted the
scope’s glare setting.
He saw figures. Imperials. Dark blobs. PDF and Regiment Civitas,
manning the defences, invisible from the street behind the solid defences, but
oh so vulnerable from this lofty viewpoint.
Where are you, Drumroll?
“Drumroll, this is Sentry. Respond, urgent!”
“I hear you. Sentry. Little busy just now.”
“They’re pushing hard, Drumroll.”
“Dammit, I said wait!”
Saul panned around again. Figures. An ammo runner scrambling up to the
barricade with pannier boxes. A medic, bent over a sprawled body. Three
riflemen in cover, firing. A vox-officer on one knee, offering up a speaker
horn.
Offering up a speaker horn to a man whose very body language told of
frustrated anger.
“Hello, Drumroll,” Saul said softly in Low Gothic, sniggering to himself at
the odd sound of it.
He’d taken off his right glove so his hand was bare, and settled it around
the grip. His one perfect finger hooked gently against the trigger.
With his gloved left hand he pulled a kill-dip from his belt pouch and
snapped it into the long-las’ belly.
The weapon pinged and a little red light lit up.
Charged to power.
“In the name of the Bead, Drumroll! We’re getting pasted here!”
“Shut up, Sentry! Keep it together. Rolling is inbound to you. Keep it
together and no one will get killed.”
Not a promise you’re really in any position to make, Saul thought.
He didn’t slow his breathing for the shot. He didn’t have to. His lungs had
been replaced thirty years before by augmetic air-exchangers which did the
work with no moving parts and therefore no body motion. He simply shut
them off and went rigid, a flesh statue.
The long-las cracked.
Saul pulled the weapon in and sat back against the wall.
“Say again?”
“Down! He’s down!”
“Say again, Drumroll!”
“He’s dead! Vibreson’s dead!”
So much for your silly code names, Saul thought.
Fear and confusion. More devastating than a full motor division. The PDF
around the chapel panicked when their beloved leader went down. In under
fifteen minutes, that panic turned into a fatal flaw.
Rushed by death-brigades, the line broke. It broke at six other places along
the Principal at roughly the same time. Headless, the Imperial defenders went
into a mindless spiral and were slaughtered.
By midnight, the invaders had smashed their way into the Civitas as far as
Loman Street, just a few blocks short of Astronomer’s Circle, deep in the
western sectors of the city. Saul followed the tide, walking in its bloody
wake through burning streets piled with PDF dead.
Just after midnight alone and on foot he pushed past the front-line of his
own forces and slipped away into the dark streets of the mid-city and the
Guild Slope. The rapidly retreating, badly organised Imperial defences were
easy to avoid.
The target awaited him.
The war grumbled far above him like someone else’s nightmare. Leg-mounts
splashing through warm water, Karess advanced. Where the limestone
chambers became too tight and encumbering, he used his cutting beams to
burn them smooth and open. The reek of cooked stone and ash filled the air.
Karess couldn’t smell it. He couldn’t feel the heat. He felt nothing but the
machine-induced pain of his being. He strode forward, metre by metre, into
the belly of the Civitas.
“The west has fallen,” said the life company aide.
Kaldenbach turned to face him, a harrowed look on his face.
“Fallen?”
“Broken, sir. Gone. Vibreson’s dead. They’re pouring in through the
Glassworks now.”
The room, a small sub-chamber in the basement of an Ironhall
manufactory, fell silent. The phospha lamps flickered. Vox officers looked up
from the portable rigs and apparatus they’d set up in the makeshift command
space.
Kaldenbach had been holding the Ironhall for nearly eighteen hours, and
was excessively proud of that achievement The Guard forces under Gaunt in
the east had done well too, but Kaldenbach felt their efforts had been nothing
compared to those of himself and his men. Two spearheads of the archenemy
had struck at the Ironhall, and he’d fended them off.
If the Glassworks had gone, then his entire left flank was open suddenly.
Kaldenbach waved Captain Lamm over to the hololithic tactical display.
“We’re down to the wire here, mister. I need you to mount a counter-guard.
Here, here and here. Use Principal II as a line defence.”
“Gladly. What can you give me?”
“Nine units. Your own carriers. I’ll signal the marshal and get him to send
reinforcements up.”
“He needs to do more than that, sir,” said Captain Lamm. “He needs to
extend his forces along the Guild Slope, or we might as well give up now.”
Kaldenbach nodded. “Get out there, Lamm,” he ordered. “Vox officer… to
me!”
The night air was bitter and dry. Lamm moved his units forward through the
emptied city streets towards the swell of fire light that marked the archenemy
advance. They had all switched to rebreathers. Too many processors had
been choked and destroyed in the invasion.
Fanning out his overstretched forces reached Principal II and some of them
engaged. Lamm broke into a hab unit and went up to the top floor with a vox
man and three of his officers to get a good overview.
Lamm knelt at the sill of an upper floor window and swung his field
glasses over the burning, dying Civitas below. Fires and explosions showed
up as points of white light so bright they baffled the instrument’s filters.
“There,” said Lamm. “There on the walkway. Bring a unit in there now.”
The vox-man didn’t reply.
Lamm looked round, blinking to adjust his sight to the gloomy room. There
was no sign of Forbes, his vox-man. Or of his three fellow officers.
Lamm rose, bemused.
“What…?”he began.
He heard something stir in the apartment’s adjoining bathroom.
“This is out of order, you idiots!” he barked, drawing his pistol all the
same. “Where the hell are you? Forbes? This is no time for a joke!”
“Respond!”
The crackly voice made Lamm jump. It came from the vox-caster. It was
leaning against the wall, straps dangling. There was no sign of the vox-man
who had been carrying it.
There was another noise from the bathroom. Lamm raised his pistol and
fired at the door. The las-round punched a hole in the fibre-board. Light
shone through it. With the snout of his pistol, he pushed the bathroom door
open.
The overhead light was on, shade-less, bright, harsh.
Lamm found Forbes and his three officers. They were in the moulded
plastic bathtub.
They had been stripped of their clothes and their skins and of all
semblance of articulation. The tub was full to the brim with a thick, gleaming
bouillabaisse of blood and meat and bones and organs. Blood trickled down
the side onto the tiled floor.
Lamm gasped in disbelief then fell to his knees and vomited.
He heard a swish behind him, in the dark. It was the swish of a cloak. A
cloak of wet, human skin.
Lamm rolled and fired, blasting shot after shot against the far wall of the
room.
He stopped firing and rose, gun clenched in a shaking hand. His own
breath rasped in his ears. He swung the gun round, left and right. Had he
killed it? Had he?
Lamm’s chest suddenly felt warm. He blinked and raised his hand. His
chest was awash with thick, hot blood.
His hand went up to his throat and two of his fingers unexpectedly went in
through a slit in the flesh that hadn’t been there ten seconds before. His
fingertips nudged his exposed larynx, neck tendons and oesophagus. His
throat had been cut. He felt no real pain, just enormous surprise.
Skarwael finished his artistry. His boline, double-bladed, each edge
mono-molecular sharp, punched into Lamm’s teetering, choking form. He
revealed the length of the spine while the man was still standing upright, and
cut down through his kidneys and lumbar muscles.
Blood squirted out under pressure. Skarwael opened his mouth and stuck
out his long, grey tongue as it spattered over him.
Lamm fell over onto his face.
Skarwael smeared the blood on his cheeks up and around his deep eye
sockets. It made them seem even blacker and deeper against his stretched,
white flesh.
He sighed. He would not be so patient and merciful with the Beati.
Pater Sin hushed his eyeless charges and cuddled them to his sides. They
were walking down the middle of Principal I in the dark, fires around them,
and the runt psykers were skittish. They were right in the middle of the wide
highway.
Figures emerged from cover ahead of them. Imperial men. Their lasguns
were raised. They shouted challenges, certain no enemy would approach so
brazenly and out in the open. A shell-shocked pilgrim and his children, in
desperate need of help, wandering blind… that’s who they were…
Sin leant down and whispered into the ears of his runts and they trembled.
They opened their wet, slit mouths wide. A deep buzzing filled the air.
The Imperial troopers came to a halt and turned to look at one another
dimly. Then they opened fire. Within five seconds they were all dead,
comrade killed by comrade.
The little malformed creatures closed their mouths and Sin used the hem of
his silk robes to dab the spittle away from the corners of their mouths. Then
he took them by the hands, one on each side, and led them on past the
scattered bodies. The psykers stumbled, reluctant, like very young children.
One began to open and close its mouth in a soft, agitated manner. The other
had his free arm up and crooked, and was waving his hand back and forth
next to his ear.
“We’re almost there,” Sin crooned over and over to his runts. “Almost
there…”
Viktor Hark crept forward through the firelit rubble of the Masonae. His
plasma pistol was drawn.
“Mkendrick?” he voxed impatiently. “Mkendrick? Where the feth are
you?”
There was no response from eighteen platoon. They had been holding the
cross street at Armonsfahl Boulevard West, but they hadn’t answered
standard vox in fifteen minutes.
Hark didn’t need this delay. His mind was on Soric. He wasn’t sure how
to break it to Gaunt, but his duty was clear. Soric had to die. He was a
liability. A psyk-stain. He was a danger. Meryn had been right Even Soric’s
own men, people like Vivvo, couldn’t hide him any longer.
Hark felt sad about it. Soric was a good man and the Verghastite Ghosts
loved him. But that didn’t hide the truth that Soric was too lethal to live. Far,
far too lethal. He needed a round in the head before it came to anything
worse.
That was a commissar’s job. In simple terms. In black and white. That was
the duty. And Hark was nothing if not a slave to duty.
Hark tripped and fell flat on his face. His pistol bounced away into the
street shadows. He cursed his stupid self and looked back at what he’d fallen
over.
Hark froze.
He’d tripped over Mkendrick. The Tanith was dead, exploded, ripped
apart In the street around. Hark slowly resolved the other bodies in the
darkness. Lentrim, Mkauley, Dill, Commo… all the men and women of
eighteen platoon. All dead.
“Oh Holy Terra…” Hark mumbled and reached for his micro-bead. Then
he froze again. Above the smell of soot and blood, he could suddenly detect a
stink like crushed mint, and rancid milk.
He glanced up and saw them.
Sliding their clammy grey hides against one another, the triplets slithered
down the street. Though three, they moved sinuously as one. Their weapon
frames clacked as they reloaded.
Hark reached for his fallen plasma pistol, but it was too far away. Rolling,
he wrenched out his back-up, a snub-nose Hostec Livery hard-slug revolver.
He fired it. The cut-nose round smacked into the greasy flank of one of the
loxatl, and it began to hiss and whistle like a kettle on a burner ring.
Its two brethren fired their flechette cannons.
Hark rocked, as if caught in the slipstream of some large, fast-moving
vehicle that had passed close by. But he did not fall, nor did he feel any pain.
He looked round slowly. Three metres away from him, he saw his left arm,
cleanly severed, lying in a widening pool of arterial blood. He couldn’t see
out of his left eye either.
With an angry, helpless cry, Hark slumped over onto his back and began
the swift and involuntary job of bleeding to death.
TEN
THE SECOND DAY
“Our high and mighty Lord General Lugo says ‘victory or death!’ ”
“What gives him the idea we’re being offered a choice?”
—Rawne
A few minutes before sunrise on the second day, from his command post high
in the hives, Lugo sent out the order to withdraw.
With the north-western suburbs of the Civitas wide open, the Ironhall
district came under increasing pressure during the second half of the night,
and Kaldenbach had finally, reluctantly, signalled that his forces could no
longer hold onto it.
When the order reached Gaunt, he cursed even though he saw the sense of
it. If Kaldenbach fell back, the Masonae would be left alone, a salient
vulnerable to the pincer of the archenemy forces flowing in around it.
The northern Civitas sectors had to be given up.
Fortunately, Kaldenbach was a sound leader and a man of method. He did
not simply throw his overstretched forces into flight. He knew the vital
importance of a measured retreat, knew that ground must be given only for
tactical consolidation. He coordinated with Gaunt so that the entire line
could be withdrawn as cleanly as possible, supplying mutual cover and
support.
It was a tough and bloody process, and it took five hours. On more than a
dozen occasions, it nearly failed. Twice, PDF armour on the Glassworks
flank retreated too fast, without provisioning cover for the infantry sections
north of it, and created gaps that Kaldenbach managed to plug through the
narrowest of luck. Then a charge of enemy AFVs against Kaldenbach’s own
command section almost managed a coup de grace which was only held off
by an improvised counter-strike by men of the Regiment Civitas. Gaunt’s
withdrawing sections were harried by airstrikes, three of which damaged the
line badly and led to precarious moments of redeployment as invader units
tried to capitalise on the weaknesses. Then Daur’s units were sent east along
Farkindle Street to take the pressure off a brace of platoons trying to
withdraw under fire, but found their route impossibly blocked by a streetwide
firestorm. Raglon’s platoon, already backed into a certain measure of
safety, extemporised courageously, and pushed forward again, in time to
provide the cover Daur had been prevented from supplying.
Any one of these near-disasters might have cut a hole in the retreating
Guard line, and that would have quickly ensured a miserable doom for every
soldier in the withdrawing forces.
In the hour before noon, under a pale sky leaden with the smoke of the
burning outer city, the last of Gaunt’s and Kaldenbach’s forces reached the
defences of the Guild Slope and were absorbed into the second line. To their
north, at their heels, the monstrous regiments of the archenemy surged down
through the abandoned suburbs to begin the concentrated assault of the Guild
Slope.
The second phase of the battle for the Civitas Beati had begun.
Shells and other ranged munitions were now falling on the inner city, and
striking the hive towers too. The explosions dotting the vast faces of the
soaring hives seemed like match-sparks on the slopes of mountains, but the
damage was progressive. Heavier artillery was advanced from the obsidaes
to positions inside the captured north up-city. The enemy’s airpower also
began to concentrate its attacks on the hive superstructures. Anti-fighter
batteries on the roofs and upper levels of all four hive towers, most of them
hastily erected during the previous days, set up brusque resistance. From the
Guild Slope, the display was intense, even if smoke cover frequently
obscured it: the attack craft, zipping and circling like flies through air striped
and fretted with tracer and laser fire and the blossom of detonations.
Other sounds rolled in across the Civitas too: ghastly sounds. Filthy
proclamations of warp-texts were flooding the vox channels, or being
broadcast from the speakers of advancing armour at high volume.
The fallen prayer horn, Gorgonaught, was set back on its shot-up tower
and directed at the hives. Through it, obscenity was blasted, often the
amplified screams of Imperial troops, citizens or pilgrims captured during
the first phase. The aural assault chilled and unsettled the already rattled and
weary defenders, life company commissars — the Keetle twins especially —
were kept busy chastening, by execution, those soldiers whose mettle broke
under the psychological torment.
For it became hard to think. It became hard to want to be alive. By the
early afternoon, though the effects of the noise bombardment had yet to fully
penetrate the interior of the hive towers, all those in the open Guild Slope
and mid-city, including the bulk of the defenders, were sweating and sick.
Nerves were frayed, stomachs acid and swilling. Even so, they had to fight
on. The death-brigades assaulted the Guild Slope from north-east and northwest.
At the barricades, defence lines and strong points. Imperial troopers
fought and died with tears in their eyes, driven to anguish by the sputtering,
hissing sounds of evil incarnate.
Soric had stopped reading the message shell notes that came to him. The
writing had become increasingly spidery and frantic, and where it was
legible, it was simply abuse. He was a weak fool. He was a coward. He was
gakking scum. The author, whatever it was, whatever part of him it might be,
had become incoherent and desperate.
He rested his platoon for fifteen minutes between artillery barrages, and
sat on his own in a doorway, hunched up, hands twitching, smoking a lhostick.
There was a taste of bile in his mouth that would not go away, and his
eye kept watering. He kept looking for Hark. Hark knew.
Soric had been a brave man all his life. For all the sickness and fear he
felt, now more than ever he knew Milo had been right. Soric just had to be
brave enough now to do it the right way.
If it wasn’t already too late.
“Mohr!” Soric shouted as he got up and squashed the stub underfoot. His
unit’s vox-officer ran up smartly.
“Find Gaunt for me, if you please.”
Mohr nodded, set his caster down, and started to speak into the horn as he
adjusted the tuning dials.
“Heading for the field station on Tarif Street, chief.”
Soric checked his chart. Tarif Street was close.
“He’s been summoned to see Commissar Hark, chief,” Mohr added.
Soric’s face darkened. Too late, too late, too late…
“Vivvo!” he yelled.
“Chief?”
“You have platoon command here for the duration, lad. Listen to orders
and make a good job of it.”
“Chief? Where are you going? Chief?”
But Soric was already thumping away down the street.
Filmy grey smoke from tank shelling wafted down the narrow roadway in the
Guild Slope. Ornate guild-owned warehouses stood on either side of the
cobbled lane, and to the south, up the gentle incline, the colossal masses of
the hive towers rose above the rooftops.
There was little, Varl considered, that distinguished this particular street
from the one immediately north of it, or the one directly south. They were all
part of the mid-city maze, all shell-pummelled and smoke-choked.
This street, however, marked the second line, the defensive ring around the
mid-city to which all Imperial forces had withdrawn. More particularly, this
street was the assigned part of the second line that was his platoon’s duty to
hold. A block away to the west was a company of PDF riflemen. A block to
the east, Varl had it on good authority — well, tac logis at least — was a
quartet of life company tanks. He hadn’t seen them, but he trusted they were
there.
Since noon, it had been quiet in his immediate neighbourhood, apart from
the echoing torment of the archenemy’s broadcasts and a single push-assault
from a Blood Pact death-brigade that his men had discouraged with their
excellently positioned enfilade.
Varl took a squint down the street where the men of number nine platoon
were all in cover, waiting. He saw Baen, his platoon’s scout, hurrying back
to him from a foray down to the crossroads.
Pater Sin and his two charges were walking in step behind Baen.
Varl slid a lho-stick out of his jacket pocket and held it out to Brostin, in
cover beside him. Brostin obligingly singed the tip of his sergeant’s smoke
with the hot-blue pilot light of his flamer.
Drawing deep and exhaling, Varl nodded to Baen as he drew close. The
Pater and the psykers were virtually at Baen’s heels.
“Anything?” Varl asked.
Baen shook his head. “Not a fething sign. I checked the crossroads and just
over. They’re shelling Katz Street for all they’re worth, poor PDF bastards.
But nothing. Except—”
“Except what?”
Baen shrugged. Sin placed his massive hands firmly on the shoulders of
his two runts and walked them forward. All three passed between Varl and
Baen.
“Got this funny feeling we’re being watched,” said Baen.
Varl smiled. “It’s nothing. Just edge. We all feel it.”
Sin paused, and kept his psykers huddled close to him as he stepped back
and gazed into Varl’s face. He recognised the man’s uniform. Tanith. These
men were Ghosts. The ones who had robbed him of his victory on Hagia.
He’d come so close there, and had only escaped with his life thanks to a
warning from his guide psykers. Very few of his breed had escaped Hagia
alive.
Resentment and vengeance simmered inside him. Sin’s lips curled back
from his implanted steel fangs. These were the wretches who had denied
him. This one, a sergeant by his markings, slovenly, casual, disfigured by an
augmetic shoulder. A worthless little bastard who—
For a moment, Sin almost let the psyk-cloak drop so they could see him.
He could kill them all, slaughter them, turning their own guns on them.
But patience and devotion to his sworn duty kept him true He’d over-taxed
his children already, and he wanted them strong and refreshed for the work
ahead. They were tired, and that made them harder to control. One of them
persisted in waving his hand. Masking was easier than goading, otherwise
he’d have turned this street into a charnel place to make passage.
Besides, his revenge on the Tanith would be total when his work was
complete These men would all be dead soon. Better still, they would die
stripped of all hope and faith.
He led his children away, up the climbing street. They crossed three more
blocks, ignored by the Imperial defenders, and then turned directly south. Sin
put his hands flat on the tops of his psykers’ heads. They both winced and
murmured.
Sin felt his way. He was close enough now.
He hurried the pair of them off the roadway into a covered market. The
produce shops were all closed up and shuttered, and wooden screens had
been partially raised to protect the glass roof.
He led the runts down the tiled walkway of one of the marketplace’s
aisles, and then crouched them down behind a buttonmaker’s cart.
Sin soothed them with his low, sweet moaning, and lulled them into a
calm, trance state by repeated use of their ritual command words.
They both became motionless. Even the waving stopped.
“Reach out,” he whispered. “Find the instrument…”
His tattooed skin flushed and prickled as he felt their nightmarish minds
seethe and boil. The low buzzing began. Slowly, a street at a time, they
reached out, hunting.
Hunting for the flawed. The dangerous. The suitable.
There was one. No, too strong.
There! Another, weaker… but, no. Injured.
Another… and it recoiled, too fragile to be imprinted.
“More, more…” he soothed.
There…
Rawne blinked. He put his hand to his mouth, coughed, and when he brought
the hand away again, the palm was wet with aspirated blood.
“You all right?” Banda asked.
Rawne didn’t answer her. He started to walk away towards the exit that
led out from the hab into the street.
“Major?” Banda called, more urgently.
“Major Rawne?” Caffran said, getting up out of cover at a broken window
to hurry after his platoon leader.
“As you were, trooper,” Rawne said sharply, and coughed again.
Outside, tank rounds from the latest wave of Blood Pact assault whizzed
and thumped into the nearby manufactories. Small-arms fire rattled and
cracked up the open street.
Leyr, three platoon’s scout, was watching the door, head down, and looked
in dismay as Rawne started to walk past him.
“Sir!”
“Get out of my way,” said Rawne.
“Sir!” Leyr cried, more insistently. “You’ll be dead in five seconds if you
stick your head out of that d—”
He reached out a hand to grab Rawne’s arm. Rawne lashed around, blood
dripping from his nose. His fist caught Leyr around the side of the head and
smacked the scout to the ground.
Feygor lunged, leaping over the sprawled Leyr and crashing into Rawne.
He brought the major down hard in the doorway, nudging the wooden door
open. Enemy fire, fierce and unabating, smashed into the door and its
surround, filling the air with wood chips and dust.
Rawne had landed on his back. Prone, he lashed out a kick with both legs
that propelled Feygor, doubled up, right across the room, and also flipped
Rawne back onto his feet. Caffran came in fast from the side, throwing a
punch that Rawne blocked with a raised forearm. Caffran rallied with
another smash, and Rawne turned that away with a hard, open palm,
sidestepping Caffran’s third blow, and elbowed the trooper in the throat.
Caffran fell down on all fours, gasping. Leyr was up again by then,
swinging a hook at the side of Rawne’s head. Rawne grabbed the scout’s
wrist and twisted so hard it almost broke. Leyr cried out in pain, and fell to
his knees. Feygor dubbed Rawne across the shoulders and neck with both
fists locked together.
Rawne staggered, blood flying from his nose. He swung out with a side
kick that threw Feygor back against the wall, and then turned and staggered
towards the door.
Banda brought him down.
She rolled Rawne over under her, and pressed her straight silver to his
neck. Desperate, she glared down into his face.
“Elim! Elim! What the gak are you trying to do?”
He looked up at her, and then went limp, his unfocused eyes refocusing.
“Feth…” he stammered.
She climbed off him, keeping her warknife raised, point towards him.
Rawne got up as Caffran, Feygor and Leyr closed in again.
Rawne blinked at them all.
“Caff? Jessi? Murt? What the feth was I just doing…?”
No! Too strong. Too willful. Too beloved by other souls that anchored him
and dragged him back.
The twins were upset. They started to howl and whimper, and the buzzing
leaked out of their open mouths.
“Sssshhh!” Sin cooed at them. “There’ll be another. Find him. Find the
instrument. Reach out.”
Calming, they sent out their minds again.
There was one… no, too agitated.
Another… useless, about to be killed by the Blood Pact.
“Find one, find one… find the one who will serve and mark him out.
Imprint him. Brand him with the purpose. Make him the instrument…”
The twin minds stopped with a sudden jolt. For a moment, Sin thought he’d
have to start again, but then he realised they had stopped because they had
found exactly what they were looking for.
Without doubt.
Pater Sin smiled. Through his empathic rapport with the runts, he could
taste the chosen instrument’s mind. It was delicious. Perfect.
“Brand that one!” he hissed, and the imprinting began.
Brin Milo bunked. His head hurt and he was beyond any fatigue he had ever
known.
“You need to sleep,” she said.
Milo looked up. He wasn’t sure if it had been an instruction or an
assessment. He couldn’t tell with her.
“I’m tired,” he said.
Sabbat smiled. “We’re all tired, Milo. But it won’t be much longer now.
Fate has made its decision. It’s coming.”
He wondered if she meant the overwhelming assault that was falling on
their position at the second line, but she seemed to be gazing at the sky for
some reason.
Milo was caked in dust and cut in a dozen places from shrapnel. Most of
Domor’s platoon, moving with them, were the same. The Bead was
unmarked and unblemished. If anything, her pale skin and golden armour
seemed brighter and cleaner than ever.
“How will this end?” he asked.
“The way fate wishes it,” she replied.
“You seem to trust in fate,” he said. “I thought you’d trust in the God-
Emperor.”
“If there is any law, any justice to this cosmos, Milo, they’re the same
thing. I have found my way, and the way is set.”
Rocket grenades slammed into the buildings west of them, and in their
wake came a ripple of mortar rounds. Milo heard Domor yelling for his
platoon to fall back. Milo got up and led the Beati after them.
All around the vaunted second line, the Imperials were withdrawing now.
Before nightfall, it would be street righting right back through the Guild
Slope towards the hives. They were losing.
Fighting hard, fighting well, but losing anyway.
Milo and Sabbat got into cover, hearing the dank of advancing enemy tanks
and the crunch of broken walls driven over under churning treads.
“I knew someone once who said that,” Milo said.
“Said what?” she asked, wiping dust from her sword blade.
“That she was looking for her way. That she had found her way.”
“Had she?”
“I don’t know. She said that she thought her way was in war… but I didn’t
believe her.”
Sabbat frowned. “Why? Wasn’t she telling the truth?”
Milo laughed and shook his head. “Nothing like that. I just don’t know if
she realised what war means.”
“What was her name?”
“Sanian. Her name was Sanian. I knew her for a while on Hagia. We were
protecting y—”
“I know what you were doing on Hagia, Milo.”
Milo shrugged. “I think I was in love with her. She was very strong. Very
beautiful. I would have stayed with her if I could.”
“What stopped you?” asked the Beati. She turned and waved Domor’s .50
crew up to a spot where they could crossfire the advancing death-brigade
push.
“Duty?” Milo suggested.
“Duty is its own reward,” she said.
“So they say,” he replied.
“Who am I?” she asked, leaning close to him.
“You are Sabbat. You are the Beati,” he answered.
She nodded. “He’ll soon be coming.”
“So?”
“The reason I’m here and not elsewhere. The reason we’re all here.”
“I don’t understand.”
“You will,” she said. Another RPG fell close to them and blew in a wall
ten paces from where they were concealed. Milo gasped.
“Are you hurt?” she asked.
“My head. I have the worst headache.”
The Beati nodded. She crawled back under the firing line and called to
Domor.
“Shoggy!” She was delighted by the way his smile lit up when he heard
her use his nickname.
“Pull them back to Saenz Crossing. Get them dug in. Armour support is
coming.”
“How do you know that, Holiness?” Domor called back. “The vox is
down!”
“Trust me,” she said. “Do it. I won’t be long.”
Somehow oblivious to — or invulnerable to — the shells and crossfire
drumming around them, she led Milo through the devastated streets to a small
Civitas chapel whose roof had been taken off by the recent efforts of the
archenemy. The chapel had been dedicated to Faltomus.
The cracked rafters smouldered, and the floor was littered with chafstone
tiles and broken pews. She beckoned him forward across the debris until
they were standing in front of the aquila altarblock. Milo’s head throbbed and
rolled. He could hear how close to the bloody front of the fight they were.
Why had she brought him here? She was so vital, so valuable. She was taking
such a risk. This was crazy…
With gentle hands, she turned his dirty face towards the altar and pressed
the middle three fingers of her right hand against his brow.
In a second, a single wonderful second of glass-cold clarity, his headache
cleared and he saw everything.
Everything.
“You know it all now. Will you stand with me?”
“I would have done anyway.”
“I know. But I mean it. Gaunt does not understand. Will you stand with me,
even in the face of his displeasure? I know you love him like a father.”
“This is too important, Sabbat. I will. And Gaunt will understand.”
Sabbat nodded. A golden glow seemed to back-light her eyes. “Let us—”
“I think we should make observance first,” Milo said. “I mean, this
undertaking is so dangerous, we should offer a prayer to the God-Emperor…
to fate… while we still have a chance.”
“You’re right. You’re here to remind me such things are right,” she said.
They settled to their knees before the altar.
Saul sucked in his breath. The tagger points of his scope now blinked on
empty space. Just a second before, he’d had a near-perfect shot. The broken
lancet window looking into the Chapel of Faltornus, five hundred metres,
negligible cross-wind… no adjustment he couldn’t make.
For a while, she’d been screened by the boy, the young Guard trooper,
who’d kept getting in the line of sight. Saul was confident one of his custom
rounds would penetrate the boy’s body and waste the Beati too, but he didn’t
want to risk it. Neither did he want the impurity. He wanted a clean head-shot
The Beati. In his sights. As the Magister would have wanted it. One shot.
But the bloody boy would not get out of the way. Not until the last minute,
when he had disappeared suddenly below the level of the broken sill.
Kneeling, presumably.
For one brief moment, the Beati was exposed, a clear shot through the
broken lancet.
Then she too dropped from view beside the boy. What were they doing?
Praying, he supposed. As if that would do any good now.
Saul slid his long-las back from the gap. The hab he was in was almost a
kilometre long, bridging over six Guild Slope streets, and there were
windows all along it. He could easily slip down to another firing position
and get her on the way back up.
Saul started to gather his kit up and paused. He suddenly felt that rush only
a sniper ever feels. He ducked.
Six hundred plus metres west, Hlaine Larkin raised his aim and sighed. He
could have sworn he’d seen something at that hab window. A shooter lining
up. Gone now.
Sliding quietly to one side, he touched his micro-bead.
“See him?”
A pause. “No.”
“Keep her looking,” Larkin said. “He’s there. I swear.”
Saul snuggled up against a window five arches down and took the scope off
his gun. He peered out, using the device free, like a telescope. There was the
chapel. Still no movement.
He waited. How long does a prayer last?
He couldn’t shake off that feeling, that six sense rush.
Just to be safe, he dropped back to the next window.
He scoped again. This time, a movement. The briefest suggestion of heads.
He fitted his scope back onto his long-las and rolled over to the window’s
far corner, lining up.
The prayer finished, Milo and Sabbat rose back into view. He saw her nod
to him and say something. Saul had his shot. Clean… no, the boy was in the
way again. If he leant out further…
There he was! Larkin tensed and then slumped back. He saw movement in the
hab window, but a chimney stack was blocking direct shot from his position.
“Have you got it? Tell me you’ve got it!” he snarled into his vox-link.
Saul’s unscarred finger began to squeeze the trigger. There was a crackwhine,
a distant echo, and for one glorious moment Saul thought he’d fired.
But the counter on his lasgun still read full.
Exploded by a hot-shot round, Saul’s head came away entirely. His
corpse, smoking at the neck, fell back into the hab. The long-las clattered
from his hands, unfired.
“She got him, Larks!” Jajjo voxed gleefully.
Kneeling beside him, in the shelter of the dorm window, Nessa Bourah
raised her smoking long-las and grinned.
The recirculated air in the Tarif Street triage was clammy, and stank of
chemicals. A stream of trucks, driven by civilian volunteers, nosed into the
yard, shirting the mobile wounded back to the infirmaries in the hives. Gaunt
pushed his way in through the crowds of casualties. Screams and moans and
frantic voices came at him from all sides.
“Where’s Dorden?” Gaunt yelled.
Foskin, his smock spattered with blood, glanced up from a thrashing life
company trooper on a stretcher and pointed down the hall.
“Doctor?”
Dorden appeared through a makeshift screen made from a plastic sheet
nailed to a door frame. He too was soiled in blood, and his face was sunk
with fatigue.
“In here,” he said.
Several orderlies were lifting Hark onto a trolley for evacuation to the
hives. Gaunt could barely see the commissar under the plastic hood of the
medical respirator and the sterile packing wadded to his left side. Thick IV
drips and other tubes snaked out of his body, hooked up to fluid packs
hanging from a wire stand at the head of the gurney, and to a resuscitrex unit
and a haemopump stowed underneath.
“Feth…” said Gaunt. He glanced at Dorden.
“Massive trauma to the left body. Lost his arm, his left eye, his ear, and a
lot of bone mass and tissue, dell’s boys found him, got him back here. He’d
almost bled out.”
“Will he make it?”
The floor shook.
“Will any of us?” Dorden asked darkly.
“You know what I mean!”
Dorden sighed. “He’s strong. Determined. He might. We’re shipping him
back for intensive. Ibram…”
“What?”
“When Grell found him, Hark was surrounded by the corpses of
Mkendrick and his entire platoon.”
“All… all dead?”
“Yes. Grell said it was like a butcher’s shop. Something really did a
number on them.”
“The Blood Pact are—”
Dorden shook his head, and picked up a little stainless steel surgical dish.
He held it out. Several objects lay in it, matted with blood. Gaunt reached in
to take one, curious.
“Don’t,” Dorden said. “Unless you want to slice off your finger tips.”
“Are they what I think they are?”
Dorden nodded. “Blade slivers from a loxatl flechette round. I dug them
out of Hark’s shoulder.”
“God-Emperor, they’ve throwing everything at us.”
“It’s the only report I’ve had of loxatl injuries, but I thought you should
know.”
“Thanks,” Gaunt said. “I need to get back out there.”
“One more I want you to see,” said Dorden.
The ward room was reserved for the most seriously injured, including
those that Dorden didn’t dare move. The doctor led Gaunt over to a corner
bunk where a Tanith trooper lay on vital support. It was Costin, the drunk
whose carelessness had damaged Raglon’s platoon so badly on Aexe.
“You heard what Raglon’s platoon did this afternoon?” Dorden asked.
Gaunt nodded. He was proud of them. They’d improvised a cover action
when Daur had been cut off, and in doing so had saved more than seventy
men.
“Raglon brought Costin in. Gut-shot in the fight. Probably won’t last the
day. But Raglon wanted him cared for particularly. The cover action was
Costin’s work. Raglon told me this himself. Raglon got pinned down, so
Costin took point and led the platoon in. Set up some fierce cover. Got all
those men out. Raglon wants to recommend him for valour.”
Gaunt looked at Dorden. Weariness had robbed the medic of his usual
subtlety.
“So if I’d had my way and executed Costin on Aexe, all these lives would
have been forfeit. You’re saying I should thank you for—”
“Don’t be an arse, Gaunt!” Dorden snarled, turning away. “I was just
telling you how it was.”
“You’re right,” said Gaunt. Dorden stopped. “I’m a commissar, and you’re
a medic. There are always going to be times when our first duties clash…
dash in the worst ways. Hard discipline and selfless care do not overlap
comfortably. I suppose it’s a problem two friends on either side of that
divide have to live with.”
“I suppose it is.”
“But now, here… I’m sorry. You were right.”
Dorden looked away, awkwardly. “Okay, then. Haven’t you got a war to
win or something?”
Gaunt pushed his way back out through the screen and found himself facing
Soric in the hallway.
“Chief? What are you doing here?”
Soric’s face was set firmly. “I’m sorry, sir. I hope you will believe me
when I say I meant no harm. I was always loyal, despite what he might tell
you.”
“Who? What is this?”
“Just do me one thing, sir. Hear me out and then make it quick.”
“Make what quick, Agun?”
“My execution, sir.”
“Soric? What the feth are you talking about?”
“I know Hark’s told you everything, sir. I blame myself for not coming
forward earlier.”
The plastic screen behind Gaunt wrenched back, and three orderlies
emerged, wheeling Hark’s gurney to the boarding ramp.
Soric’s eyes widened as he saw the body roll past.
“I’m here because Hark’s been hit bad, Soric. He’s not been in a position
to say anything to me. So… why don’t you?”
Soric straightened up, pulling his ramshackle bulk to attention. “Colonel-
Commissar, sir. It is my duty and my shame to admit to you here that I… I
have the touch of the warp in me. It’s been in me since Phantine, and I have
pretended for too long. The curse of the psyker corrupts my mind. I have been
receiving messages, sir. Guidance, advice, warnings. All of them have been
true. I am so sorry, sir.”
“Is this a joke, Soric?”
“No, sir. I wish it was.”
Gaunt was stunned. “You realise I can take no chances, Sergeant? I have
no choice. If there is any truth in this… if you are warp-touched, I must—”
“I know it, sir.”
“What are you going to do. Gaunt? Shoot him?” Dorden stood behind
Gaunt. He’d overheard the whole exchange.
“I don’t believe even selfless medics take chances with the warp, doctor.”
“This isn’t some enemy warp-scum, Ibram,” Dorden said. “It’s fething
Agun Soric!”
“Don’t fight my corner, doc,” Soric said. “Please, it’s not right. You know
yourself what’s in me. Back on Phantine, with Corbec. I know it spooked
you.”
Both Gaunt and Dorden remembered the incident well. It had indeed
rattled them.
“It’s been getting worse since then. A lot worse.” Soric seemed to be
getting agitated, as if there was something alive in his pocket that was
nagging at him.
“Standard practice says I should shoot you right here,” said Gaunt. “But
it’s you, Agun, and I’ve never heard of a warp-freak turning himself in. Duty
troopers?”
Three sentries from the Herodian PDF hurried over. “Take this man’s
weapons, and his rank pins, and bind his limbs. Escort him to the hives and
lock him down in the securest cell they have. If he tries anything, shoot him.
And when you get to the hive, summon the local Guild Astropathicae to
examine him.”
“Yes sir.”
“Sir, please. Before they take me. I have to warn you.”
“Agun, go. Before I change my mind.”
“Sir, please!” The troopers grabbed Soric, and pinned him hard. “Please!
For the good of us all! It told me nine are coming! Nine are coming! They
will kill her and the blood will be on my hands! Please, sir! In the name of
all that’s holy! Please listen to me!”
Dragged by the troopers, shouting, Soric disappeared down the busy triage
station hallway.
“Should you have listened?” Dorden asked.
Gaunt shook his head. “Either he’s snapped under pressure, in which case,
I lament his passing, because he was a damn good soldier. Or… he’s warptouched
like he says he is. I favour the former explanation. Whichever, he has
nothing to say that I should trust. The rantings of a lunatic, or the perverse
lies of the warp.”
“Because the warp never reveals truth to mankind?”
“Not to the untrained and the unsanctioned, doctor. No, it doesn’t.”
“Psyker tricks,” said Corbec. “Sounds like it to me.”
“Fething psykers,” Feygor agreed.
“Felt like it had hold of my mind. I wasn’t me anymore. I…” Rawne’s
voice trailed off:
“What?” asked Corbec.
“If I hadn’t shaken it off, Colm. Feth. I was going to kill her.”
“Who, Banda?”
“Feth, no! Her. The Beati.”
Feygor swore colourfully. It sounded, as always, curiously funny coming
out of his flat-pitched augmetic voice box.
“Something got in your head and made you decide to kill the Saint?”
Caffran asked.
Rawne shrugged. He couldn’t tell them the truth. How would they ever
trust him again?
Something had got into his head, all right. Something so soft and strong and
seductive, he’d forgotten everything. Every loyalty, every friendship, every
oath he’d ever sworn, even his startling intense affection for Jessi Banda.
All of it, forgotten. The only thing that had remained had been his ruthless
streak of hate. His killer instinct. The part of his character that made others
eternally wary of him, the part of his character that made sure Ibram Gaunt
never quite turned his back.
The very, very worst part of him. It had swelled and grown and taken over
his mind, body and soul completely. For that brief moment, he would have
happily killed anything and anyone.
Then it had gone again, rushing out like a fast ebbing tide.
One terrible thought remained. If it had done that to him, what might it do
to others? If it had cast him aside, where had it gone now?
Milo blinked again, his mind unsteady. He was so damn tired. The effects of
the Beati’s touch were fading, and the headache was returning. Voices
seemed to be calling, as from a dream, as from the edge of sleep.
“You okay there, Brin?” Dremmond asked.
“Yeah, sure,” Milo said.
Twelve platoon was retreating carefully down a low alley in the Guild
Slope, falling back towards the hives. The second line hadn’t broken so much
as compressed. Shells sang overhead from the massed enemy batteries down
in the suburbs.
The sun was setting. Already, it was out of sight behind the rooftops. By
nightfall, they would be into the hives, sealing the hatches, making those
massive towers the site of their last stand.
Domor suddenly held up a hand, and the troopers in his company dropped
into cover positions.
All, except the Beati. Gleaming bright she walked down the alley to the
head of the position, in open view.
“Get down!” Milo hissed.
“Get down, ma’am!” Domor added, urgently.
A death-brigade stormed the street. They came running, howling, charging,
weapons blasting. Stone flecks exploded off the alley’s side walls as they
advanced.
Milo sighted up and fired. His shot brought down the closest of the ironmasked
Blood Pact. The men around him began to fire too.
Sabbat stood her ground, her power sword whirling, ricocheting lasrounds
off in all directions. She gutted the first two Blood Pacters who
reached her, and decapitated the next one.
“Into them! Into them! Straight silver!” Domor yelled, and the platoon rose
and charged, surging up around the defiant Beati, meeting the enemy head on.
Milo ran forward, his head pounding. He lanced his rifle-mounted
warknife into the face of the nearest Blood Pact trooper, twisting it to pull it
free.
He saw her. She looked so vulnerable. Just one shot One last shot and
she’d be finished.
He threw himself against the enemy tide.
The last dregs of fading daylight filtered slantwise through the partially
shuttered glass hoarding of the covered market and gleamed off Pater Sin’s
steel teeth as he mouthed soothing words to his twins. They had done their
work. They were linked to the instrument and with each passing moment they
were imprinting the task deeper and deeper into its mind.
The twins were the most potent psykers in the sector. They were alpha
level. Between them, their combined minds packed more power than all the
astropaths and psykers on Herodor, Imperial and foe alike. His children. The
children of Sin.
Karess was submerged now, ten metres deep in chalybeate spring water that
pushed at him, heavy with current. Beads of escaped gas twinkled along the
seams of his adamite casing and around the perforated cowls of his heavy
weapons. His auditory tracts rippled with the swoosh of aquatic pressure.
The rock base of the aquifer was soft, and Karess’ massive hooves
churned up silt and eyeless mote-creatures, bacterium and thermal scum.
Machine-pain thrummed through his superstructure. He checked his
positioning systems.
True south, true south. There, he would rise and kill.
Tifeh was dead. The human’s bullet had lodged deep inside it and killed it.
Chto, who had brood command, ordered Reghh to let Tifeh drop. The cold,
rank body slipped to the ground. Chto and Reghh stood up on their heels and
howled at the sky in mourning. There was no sound audible to human ears,
just a deep, sickening throb that shook the air.
Wet and gleaming, the two remaining loxatl wound round each other and
slithered away down the next street.
Their harness cannons were armed. Woe betide anything that met them
now.
“Orders, sir!” the signals officer yelled. Major Landfreed ran over to him,
ducking down below the parapet. Shrapnel fluttered through the air from the
nearby bombardment.
Orders were for the life company elements under Land-freed to fall back
to Old Hive.
Landfreed relayed the orders to his men. Since noon, he had lost sixty
troopers to the Blood Pact death-brigades. He was determined that those who
remained would stay alive. His men started to move out: two squads, tight
order.
A hi-ex shell landed just the other side of the ruined wall and the blast
shook the ground. Tiles rattled down from the remains of the rafters.
Landfreed threw himself down hard.
When he got up again, he was surrounded by smoke. He couldn’t see any
of his men.
Blinking, his eyes watering, he peered around, and found himself face to
face with a black-robed figure that appeared out of nowhere.
Landfreed froze. Terror locked up his limbs and his reflexes. He gazed up
into a face materialising just twenty centimetres from his.
It was bald and white, and utterly hairless. Deep folds crisscrossed the
skin, and made furrows around the smiling mouth and the dark eyes. A dried,
brown residue soiled the eye-sockets. It was the face of death, the bogey man
that Landfreed had been taught to fear.
The haunter of the dark.
Skarwael slowly slid the tip of his boline up Landfreed’s tunic front,
effortlessly slicing off every button in turn. The silver fastenings cascaded to
the floor, bouncing and clattering.
Skarwael’s boline stopped when it reached Landfreed’s bare throat.
Skarwael smiled. The smile made furrows deepen. Predatory teeth, whiter
than the pallid flesh that cased them, were distressingly revealed.
Landfreed tried to find a scream.
“Sir? Sir? Major Landfreed?” Some of his men — Sanchez, Grohowski,
Landis, Boles — came blundering forward through the acrid shell-smoke
looking for him, and drew to a halt, astonished by what they saw.
Landis yelled out, bringing his lasrifle up. He didn’t know precisely what
the cadaverous thing in black was, but his gut told him enough.
Skarwael wheeled, his leathery black robes swishing out and twisting
vortices in the dust-thick air. Landis’ shots rippled the dust patterns but struck
nothing solid.
Like a shadow, thrown suddenly elsewhere by a switching light-source,
Skarwael reappeared on the other side of them. A glinting splinter pistol
came up from under his cloak of raw human hides, gripped by long, pale
fingers. Energy-charged filaments of toxic crystal spat from the barrel, and
Grohowski doubled over, explosively gutted. Landis fired again, and missed
again.
“Move! Move!” Landfreed yelled, finding his voice at last. And his
laspistol.
He opened fire on the monstrous shadow, but it had vanished. With a
baffled gurgle, Landis fell on his back, shot apart by his commander’s blasts.
Boles and Sanchez fired together, hosing the ruined brick wall in front of
them with auto-fire. They had the shadow in their sights, but it moved like a
black flicker up the wall, around their raking shots, and into the air. It turned
for a moment in mid-flight, the ghastly black cape flowing out behind it like
wings, then fell on Sanchez. The life company trooper struggled and yelled
and came apart as the near invisible shadow mauled him and then threw him
aside.
Backing away, Boles looked at Landfreed.
“Run,” Landfreed said simply.
Boles ran. Behind him, Landfreed turned to face the monster, raising his
arm to shoot.
But there was no pistol. No hand. Just a cleanly severed wrist-stump.
Skarwael materialised in front of Landfreed and impaled him on his
boline.
Boles threw himself forward through the smoke and rubble. He could hear
his commander dying back there. In the back of his terrified mind, he
wondered one thing. What could make a death scream last so long?
“What’s awry?” Gaunt asked Beltayn, pre-empting his signals officer’s usual
remark.
“How about… everything?” Beltayn replied.
First platoon was dug down in Digre Street, a commercial block off
Principal I in the Guild Slope, when Gaunt rejoined them from the triage
station. The pull back from the second line was a mess compared with the
one the Imperials had staged from the northern suburbs at first light. They
hadn’t held the second line for anything like as long as Gaunt had hoped. The
archenemy was ploughing deep furrows up through the dense Guild Slope
and was already threatening the agridomes to the west. The defenders were
meant to be withdrawing to the hive towers for the last stand, a tactical move
overseen by Biagi and Lugo. Landfreed had gone off line and his forces were
in rout. Kaldenbach’s retreat was fundamentally impaired too — it seemed
from the vox-log that he’d somehow lost several of his key subordinates,
including Lamm from the Regiment Civitas. Even the Ghosts were in
disarray. Gaunt tried and failed to coordinate with Corbec and Rawne Their
actions had been delayed by incidents that the vox-log gave no details of.
The last contact from the Beati had been a report of a hellish firefight in
the low Slope region.
On Digre Street, it was getting bloody. First, fourth and twentieth platoons
were heads down under heavy bombardment. The archenemy had drawn up a
serious wedge of self-propelled guns into the skirts of the Guild Slope below
their position, and now they were pasting the area.
Bright green-yellow geysers of fire erupted from the buildings around
them, showering roof tiles and slabs into the air, and cascading rivulets of
fire down off the intact rooftops. The air smelled of burned brick dust, so
earthy and intense, it made the nostrils close.
Gaunt knew they were right on the edge now. They had a very narrow hope
of getting the withdrawal to work. If they fumbled it — and fate wasn’t with
them — they wouldn’t even live long enough to stage a last stand at the hives.
If the enemy kept this pressure up, the Imperial defence on Herodor would be
annihilated before it even reached the hives.
Gaunt ran across a burning street with Beltayn, and joined with Mkoll and
Ewler in the shelter of a half-tumbled wall.
“We need to get out now. Back to the hives.”
Mkoll nodded. “It’ll be tight.”
“Wish I could get Corbec or Rawne on the vox.”
“Too much interference,” said Mkoll. “The shelling alone is scrambling
basic signals.”
“If I put up a line here, can you start leading the men out south?” Gaunt
asked.
Ewler nodded. Mkoll shrugged. “We have to look for snipers.”
“This deep in?”
Mkoll looked at his commander darkly. “I got a report earlier. Larks and
Nessa aced a sniper right up in the Guild Slopes. He’d almost drawn the
Beati. They got him before he could take the shot.”
Mkoll showed Gaunt the location on the chart.
“Feth,” murmured Gaunt. “Really, that far in?”
“Yes,” said Mkoll. “I think they’ve got specialists deep into us now. Far,
far deeper than their main front. And they’re gunning for one thing.”
“Her,” said Gaunt.
Mkoll nodded.
Gaunt looked over at Beltayn. “Bel… raise the Beati. Raise her or anyone
with her. Tell her to fall back to the hives. My orders. She’s what they’re
after.”
Beltayn flipped the dust-cover up off his caster-set. “Do my best, sir,” he
said.
“I just got Domor,” he said, a moment later. “He says the Bead’s with him.
He’ll urge her to withdraw.”
“Tell him to do more than urge, Bel. If she dies, it’s all over.”
Beltayn nodded and turned back to his work.
Shells hammered down around them again. They all ducked.
“Right,” said Gaunt. “Let’s try and find a way out of this rat-trap. Ewler?
Take the south side there. Mkoll, with me. You too, Bel.”
They ran from cover, dodging the sprays of debris and flame. Unsteady
with his heavy vox-pack, Beltayn stumbled. Mkoll dragged him to his feet
and pushed him into cover in a hab doorway beside Gaunt.
Gaunt’s power sword took the lock off and they went inside, into a dark,
drafty hallway where the air-rush of the shells outside ebbed and sucked like
a giant respirator, fluttering paper scraps and dust back and forth.
It was pitch black. Mkoll kicked open a door and revealed an untidy hab
module. Beltayn opened another, a blank room. Mkoll hurried on, and
revealed another cluttered apartment with his boot.
“Mkoll!”
Mkoll backtracked and rejoined Gaunt and Beltayn at the door of the
empty room Beltayn had opened.
There was nothing to see, an entirely bare hab module. No carpet or rugs,
no shade on the overhead lamp, walls stripped. A door to one side, closed. A
console table drawn up in the centre of the floor, with a book on it.
“What’s the matter?” Mkoll said.
“Cover me,” Gaunt said, walking in. He had drawn his laspistol and
sheathed his sword. Mkoll glanced at Beltayn, and Beltayn shrugged.
Gaunt walked to the small table oddly set in the centre of the room, and
reached out to the book lying there It was old. So very old it was falling
apart and dissolving into dust.
He opened the cover and read the title page, knowing, with a sick feeling,
what he would find there. It was another first edition of On The Use of
Armies by Marchese.
He reached out towards it and the cover fell open, as if flipped by a strong
wind. The pages fluttered and turned.
Gaunt stared down at the open book, and began to read:
When I speak of a body in this way, I mean the body as a figure for an
armed force. To the leader, that force becomes his body…
He took a step back. He had been mindful of the things that had been
shown to him, yet now they seemed to repeat with unsubtle reinforcement.
Had he missed so much? Was he not being careful?
The closed door nearby rattled in its frame, as if shaken by a strong wind.
“Time’s short, sir,” Mkoll cried out to him from the doorway.
Gaunt beckoned the two of them in to join him.
“What is this?” Beltayn asked.
“Sir?” said Mkoll.
“Do me this one service, my friends. Come with me and prove I’m not
insane.”
Gaunt opened the door.
ELEVEN
THE CHAPEL AT NOWHERE
“Two dangers, one truly evil, one misunderstood.”
—Elinor Zaker, of the Herodian Commandery
It was a chapel, old and rundown, buried in the green twilight of the wood.
Trailing ivy and fleece-flower clung to its walls. Bright green lichens
gnawed the chafstone. Bemused, afraid, Mkoll and Beltayn followed Gaunt
around the partially collapsed wall, in through the old gate, and up the path to
the door. The scent was back, that flower scent. It was so strong it made
Gaunt feel like sneezing. It was islumbine.
Gaunt pushed open the door and stepped into the cold gloom of the chapel.
The interior was plain, but well-kept. At the end of the rows of hardwood
pews, a taper burned at the Imperial altar. Gaunt walked down the aisle
towards the graven image of the Emperor. In the stained glass of the lancet
windows, he saw the image of Saint Sabbat amongst the worthies. Mkoll and
Beltayn hung back.
“How could this be here?” Mkoll asked.
Beltayn didn’t answer. He knew what this was and the thought of it made
him too terrified to speak.
“Well,” murmured a voice from the darkness. “There you are at last.”
She was as she had been the last time: very old, and blind. A strip of black
silk was wound around her head across her eyes. Her silver hair had been
plaited tightly against the back of her skull. Age had hunched her, but standing
erect she would have towered over Gaunt.
There was no mistaking her red and black robes.
“Sister Elinor,” Gaunt said. “We meet again.”
“We do, Ibram.”
“This seems like the Chapel of the Holy light Abundant, Veniq,” he said.
“It is.”
“Which I thought was on Aexe Cardinal, a great distance from here.”
“It was once,” said Elinor Zaker. “It hasn’t been for a long time, not even
when you last visited it. It exists only as a memory now, a memory where I
can dwell.”
Beltayn groaned quietly. Mkoll blinked fast.
“Someone is disheartened to hear that,” she said, cocking her head. “You
are not alone?”
“There are three of us this time. Myself, Beltayn and my chief scout.”
She sat down on one of the pews, feeling her way with one hand, leaning
on her staff with the other. “So… this is Herodor already?” she said. “Has it
really drawn so late?”
“Yes,” said Gaunt, “And dangers press. Can you guide us?”
She settled herself against the stiff back of the pew. “The divine powers
allow me only to advise. But things have become more perilous since I last
spoke to you. Forces and elements that the tarot did not foresee have entered
the mechanism. To counterbalance this, I have been permitted to speak to you
again.”
“You’ve been trying to make contact. I apologise for ignoring the signs.
I’ve been busy.” He paused. “Permitted by who?”
She turned her head towards him. It was the fluid neck-swivel of a human
who had been habituated to helmet-display target sensors. Just like at their
first meeting, Gaunt felt as if she was aiming at him.
“The divine powers. Their name may not be uttered for it is too bright.”
“So, speak, sister,” Gaunt said. “The hour is on us. The Beati is with me,
but she may yet die by the hand of the archenemy. No more riddles.”
Elinor Zaker started. “She’s with you?”
“Yes,” said Gaunt.
She smiled a little. “Oh my God-Emperor, at last…”
“There is so little time…” Gaunt urged.
“The mechanism is delicate—”
“Shut up!” Gaunt snarled. The force of his voice made Beltayn jump.
Mkoll stared in fascination through narrowed eyes. He had seen — and, more
importantly, accepted — visions before.
“I’ve had enough of the vagueness and the enigmatic crap!” Gaunt
snapped. “Tell me! Just tell me! If you can help me win, help me win! If not,
why the feth did you ever draw me into this nonsense in the first place?”
She didn’t reply.
“Sister?”
She folded her hands in her lap. “You drew yourself in when you served
the Beati on Hagia. You drew yourself in when you spared Brin Milo from
the flames of Tanith. You drew yourself in when you listened to Warmaster
Slaydo retell the struggles of the Age of Sabbat and swore your blood oath to
finish his work. You drew yourself in long before you were even born,
before your ancestors were born, for you and your Ghosts are a small part of
a manifest destiny so great in dimension that from here, even at this high point
of it, we cannot see the beginning or the end.”
Gaunt swallowed. “I see,” he stammered.
She nodded to him. “I know you don’t. This is all you need to understand
to play your part Milo, first. He is vital. Vital to what will come hereafter.
But understand there will be no hereafter if you fail here.”
“Here? On Herodor?”
“On Herodor,” she echoed. “There is harm throughout, more than was
originally anticipated. But still, the greatest harm is within. Within your
body.”
“You use the word as DeMarchese used it. Body, meaning an armed force.
My Ghosts?”
“Indeed. You’ve been studying since we last met.”
“Yes, sister,” said Gaunt.
“Well, then. For the last time. The harm is in two parts. Two dangers: one
truly evil, one misunderstood. The latter holds the key. It’s important you
remember that, because you commissars are terribly trigger happy. That key
is more important to you now than ever before. Lastly, let your sharpest eye
show you the truth. That’s it. There will be nine.”
“What did you say—?” Gaunt began.
Reality popped like a soap bubble.
Gaunt was beside Mkoll and Beltayn in a very empty, very ruined hab
module.
“What in the name of feth just happened?” Mkoll asked.
Beltayn was quivering with fear and confusion.
“Nine…” Gaunt murmured. “Bel. Get on the vox. Find out where Soric
is.”
In darkness, the spread of carnage through the Civitas was more visible.
Whole sections of the outer skirts and slopes were ablaze, and fires clustered
and spread around the north faces of hive towers one and two as well. Gaunt
wasn’t entirely sure when the city shield had failed, but it was long gone
now, and winds from the north blew in across the Civitas basin and fanned
the firestorms.
Imperial troop units and support crews fled south up the streets of the high
Guild Slope, some on foot, some in roaring carriers and trucks. The second
line had entirely broken.
Pressing hard at a trot, Gaunt’s three platoon force got as far as the
atmosphere processor in Fenzy Yard, and there managed to hop a ride on a
quartet of PDF troop carriers that raced them up the last third of the Guild
Slope to the keep in the high town district that served as main barracks for
the Regiment Civitas.
The keep was largely intact. It had been hit by some long-range shelling,
but its main structure, overlooking Principal I, had survived. Inside the
assembly yard, hundreds of Herodian troopers were massing, loading spare
ordnance into waiting transports.
Gaunt jumped down from his ride and looked around as Mkoll and Ewler
did a head count The night air was pungent with exhaust fumes, and ringing
with the urgent shouts of men from all around. Gaunt looked up. The high
town district was the base area of the hives, and their immense forms rose up
above him, giddyingly tall and reassuringly massive. They weren’t towers,
they were vertical cities, and they were of cyclopean construction. Gaunt
took a deep breath. He had forgotten how massive they were They might
hold, for a while at least.
“Gaunt!” He turned at the sound of his name and saw Biagi pushing
through the crowds towards him. The marshal had clearly seen his own share
of the combat A hasty field dressing was taped across a wound to his hip.
Gaunt saluted. “We look to the hives now, I suppose?” he said.
“Old Hive,” said Biagi. “The lord general and the Civitas officiaries have
withdrawn there. We will compose our defence around them.”
“Isn’t Old Hive the most vulnerable?” Gaunt asked. “It’s ancient, and far
less robust than the other towers.”
“Old Hive is the seat of Herodian culture,” Biagi said. “It is our heart. The
Holy Balneary is there, and the oldest shrines. If we concentrate anywhere, it
must be there.”
The implication was grim. The other towers would be left unprotected.
Their citizens would perish. It must have been a hard decision for Biagi to
make.
Gaunt caught himself. No, the decision was easy. It was precisely the same
one that he had made during the fall of Tanith. The whole could not be saved,
and any attempt to do so would be doomed. The only course of action was to
concentrate all combat efforts to save one part of it.
Biagi stared out at the rippling fireglow lighting the northern sky.
“To think I forbade your use of flamers, Gaunt. Look how my city burns.”
“Be thankful, sir, that I ignored your orders. But for my flamers, your city
would have been burning far more, far sooner.”
Gaunt looked at Biagi. “I sent a signal on my way up. Concerning a trooper
of mine Sergeant Soric?”
“Indeed. I’ve had him escorted down from the hives as you asked. What’s
so important about him?”
“Come with me and we may find out.”
Escorted by Beltayn, and Biagi’s own signals officer Sires, Gaunt and the
marshal strode into the Regiment Civitas keep. Emergency lighting was on,
and the corridors were flushed with a dull green glow. Men hurried past them
in teams, carrying boxes of supplies or pushing munitions on carts. The old
fortress was being stripped bare of anything that might prove useful.
“Anything from Kaldenbach?” Gaunt asked.
“Brief signals. He’s caught in a pocket to the west, but he has some armour
left.”
“And the Beati herself?”
“We’re having difficulty pinpointing her right now. I have implored her to
retreat.”
“So have I. It’s imperative. You understand this war is entirely symbolic?”
“The thought had crossed my mind,” said Biagi.
“Don’t let it cross. Keep it centred. She’s what this is all about. Herodor
has no strategic importance. By coming here, she made this world a target.
This invasion has one purpose. To find her and kill her. She’s the lure. If we
recognise that and use it, we might be in with a chance.”
“Does she recognise it?” Biagi said.
Gaunt glanced at him. “I’m rather afraid that’s why she came here in the
first place, marshal.”
“I see,” said Biagi.
They came to a halt outside a security hatch, triple locked. Two PDF
sentries stood aside for them, and beat a hasty retreat when Biagi dismissed
them. The marshal fitted his authority key into the socket and the hatch
whirred open. The chamber beyond was starkly lit by white phospha lamps.
It was the keep’s brig.
A group of armed Ghosts waited for them inside: Meryn and his unit,
serving as guard detail.
“Sir!” said Meryn sharply.
“We can handle this, sergeant. Head for the evac transports. I’ll see you in
Old Hive.”
Meryn nodded. He looked angry. “You should have shot him, sir,” he said.
“I beg your pardon, Meryn?”
“He’s scum. Filth. I knew it I told Commissar Hark. The bastard should
have been executed long since.”
“That’s your opinion, is it Meryn?”
“Sir, every moment he lives, he brings shame on our regiment! I don’t
know why you didn’t do your job as commissar and shoot the bastard thr—”
Gaunt’s blow caught Meryn unawares and surprised everyone around
them. Meryn sprawled on his back, clutching at his bloody mouth.
“Agun Soric has served the Ghosts with distinction, Meryn. He
volunteered himself for detention, and he may yet prove to be something quite
different from the bogey man you fear. As far as the bringing shame thing
goes, you’re doing fine all by yourself.”
Gaunt looked up at the men of Meryn’s platoon. “I am a commissar. It’s my
business to judge. But unlike the Keetles of this bloody cosmos, I will not be
hasty in that judgment. Soric lives or dies by my word alone. Understood?”
There was a nervous growl of voices. Gaunt glanced down at Meryn. “Get
out of my sight and pray I’ve forgotten your insolence the next time we meet.”
Fargher and Guheen dragged their sergeant to his feet, and fourteenth
platoon left the chamber.
“I thought Meryn was one of your best?” Biagi said.
“He is, in a sound, unimaginative way.”
“What did he mean, then? About this Soric?”
“I need you to be patient, Biagi. Soric came to me earlier and confessed.
He’s a psyker.”
“He’s in here,” said Dorden, showing the four soldiers to the door of the fifth
cell. The Tanith doctor had taken it upon himself to escort Soric personally.
A robed astropath and two bullish men in long grey leather coats stood by the
cell door. The grey men, clutching power-goads, were officer-handlers from
the life company’s sanctioned psyker cadre. Wire-grilled augmetic damper
units were sutured into their ears and eye-sockets.
“I heard what you said. To Meryn, just then,” said Dorden.
“Did you? I trust I’m starting to live up to your high standards, doctor?”
Dorden smiled sarcastically. “One thing I don’t get,” he said. “Earlier, you
told me you believed the warp never revealed truth to mankind, especially
not to the untrained and the unsanctioned.”
“I changed my mind,” said Gaunt. “I’m not trained or sanctioned but, as
Zweil has freely pointed out, powers divine or otherwise have chosen to
speak to me. Just this afternoon, in a little chapel, I—”
“What?”
“Never mind. This it?”
Dorden opened the cell hatch.
Soric was lying on the perforated metal cot, bathed in the hard light of the
overhead phosphas. He had been badly beaten. Dorden had done his best to
patch him up.
“Feth! What happened?”
“Meryn’s platoon happened. They gave him hell on the transit down.”
“Bastards. Ignorant bastards…”
“What the hell is this?” Biagi muttered, bending down to collect up some
of the hundreds of crumpled scraps of blue paper that littered the cell floor.
Gaunt looked over his shoulder. The papers in the marshal’s hands were
covered in hasty, incomprehensible scrawl.
“I’d say that was torn from a standard Guard issue message pad,” Beltayn
said.
“Did you give him paper? Writing tools?” Biagi asked the handlers.
“No sir,” one of them grunted, his voice a slabby monotone processed
through an augmetic voicebox. “We took all personal items from the prisoner.
But they keep returning to him.”
“What the hell does that mean?” Biagi asked.
The handler crossed to Soric and searched him. Soric moaned at the touch.
The handler produced a brass shell case from Soric’s thigh pocket.
“I cannot count the number of times we’ve taken this off him. Every few
seconds, it disappears from our evidence bag and reappears in his pocket.”
The handler opened the message shell and shook out another fold of blue
paper. “And every time, there’s another note in it.”
“Have you seen this before?” Gaunt asked.
“No, sir,” said the handler.
Gaunt knelt down beside Soric. “Agun? Chief? You hear me?”
Soric’s single eye opened, squeezed to a slit by the swollen flesh of his
puffy face. The eye was bloodshot.
“Colonel-commissar, sir,” he sighed.
“There’s not much time, chief. Tell me about the nine.”
“So tired… hurts so much…”
“Chief! You were desperate to tell me before! Tell me now!”
Soric nodded slowly, and, with Dorden’s help, got himself up to a halfsitting
position.
“Nine are coming,” he said.
“Nine?”
“Nine,” he repeated, swallowing pain. “I’m so sorry, sir. I never meant to
risk yo—”
“Save it for later, Agun. Tell me about the nine.”
“Nine The shell told me there would be nine. Because nine is the sacred
number of the Beati…”
“The nine holy wounds,” said Biagi solemnly.
“The nine holy wounds,” Soric nodded. “I saw her. She was looking at me.
Right at me She knew…”
“Chief! Chief! Come on, stay with me!”
Soric had faded and slumped. Gaunt looked over at Dorden. “Can’t you do
something?”
“That will help us? Of course That will help him? No. Besides, if he’s
what you’re afraid he is, a stimm-shot might not be a good idea.”
“I think we might have to take that chance,” said Gaunt. “Agreed?”
Biagi nodded. The handlers charged their goads. The sharp stink of ozone
filled the little cell.
Dorden thumped the one-dose derma-ject into Soric’s arm and wiped the
puncture with a swab loaded with rubbing alcohol. Soric trembled, shivered
and convulsed.
Then he snapped awake, staring at Gaunt with his one good eye.
“Sir?”
“Tell me about the nine, chief.”
“Nine. That’s what it said. It wouldn’t shut up about it.” Soric raised his
hand, and Gaunt saw it was holding the brass message shell. How the feth
had it got back into his hand?
“Ever since Phantine, when I was hurt on Phantine, the thing has been
there. Not speaking to me, you understand. Writing to me. All very civilised.
I would open the shell and ooops! There’s another message. Split left, split
right, head down the wall there… all that shit. Combat shit. Just a word to the
wise. I never worried about it. God-Emperor, I know I should have! I should
have told you about it long ago!”
“Why didn’t you worry about it?” asked Gaunt.
“Because it was in my handwriting. I like a drink or two, you know that
sir. I wondered… had I written it and forgotten…?”
“All these messages?”
“No. No! But at the start of it, a little. Then, when I realised it was more
than that, I was too scared.”
“Of what?”
“Of men like you,” Soric said, pointing at Gaunt. “Of men like them,” he
added sourly, gesturing to the handlers.
“Milo told me what I should do,” said Soric. Gaunt glanced at Beltayn.
“He told me to be a man and fess up.”
“What… what is the shell telling you now, chief?”
“The shell always knows. It knew about Herodor long before we were
marked up and shipped out. It knew. It just knows. Nine. Nine are coming.”
“Nine what?”
“Nine killers.”
“Coming to kill the Beati?”
Soric nodded.
“There is a vast army on Herodor trying to kill the Beati,” said Biagi.
“But the nine are special. They have been charged by the Magister. They
are deep inside us. The shell says so. Deeper inside us than we dare realise.”
“What are they?” Gaunt asked.
“Wait,” said Soric. He put the message shell back into his pocket and then
drew it out again. When he opened it there was a flimsy sheet of blue paper
folded up inside.
He flattened the sheet out to read it, and held it up close to his deformed
eye.
“Nine A marksman. Three psykers. Three reptiles. A phantom. A deathmachine.”
Outside the simple cell, Gaunt leaned heavily against the wall and wiped the
rank sweat from his brow.
“Did you feel it in there?”
Biagi nodded.
“Like a swamp suddenly, so hot, so damp…”
“He’s a psyker. He should burn.”
“Not while he’s useful. Forget the invasion force, the archenemy has
deployed specialist assassins into the Civitas. We have to find them fast.”
“But—”
“Think, Biagi! I told you this war was symbolic! All that matters, all that
your world is worth, is the life or death of the Beati. We have to find these
killers and kill them before they win this outright.”
Biagi shrugged. “What do we know? He told us so little. A marksman…?”
“Dead already, I think,” said Gaunt “One down. The reptiles…”
“We know there are loxatl active,” said Dorden. Gaunt nodded.
“He mentioned a phantom,” said Biagi. “I interviewed a life company
trooper called Boles just thirty minutes ago. He told me how Landfreed and a
whole fire-team were taken down by a ghost that came out of nowhere.”
“Ghost?” Dorden echoed.
Biagi smiled. “Forgive me A spectre. Boles is an experienced veteran. He
was sure it was of the piratical devil-breed.”
Gaunt shuddered. Not since his days as a cadet, many years before
Balhaut, had he been forced to deal with those vicious killers, the so-called
dark eldar.
“What about the three psykers? And this… what did he call it? This deathmachine?”
“We’ll find them,” said Gaunt.
“How?” Biagi laughed.
“We’ll find the Beati. They’re all looking for her.”
“What did the prophecy mean, sir?” Beltayn asked as he walked with Gaunt
out through the exit hatches of the keep.
“Sister Elinor said there were two dangers: one truly evil, one
misunderstood. I believe that misunderstood one is Soric. Remember, she
told me to be wary, because commissars are trigger happy? That seems to fit
He’s the key and I could have had him executed before I found that out.”
“What about the other?”
“Well, that’s what we’re looking for.”
“And what did she say at the end… ‘Let your sharpest eye show you the
truth’?”
Gaunt nodded. “Raise all sections still in the field. Tell them the Beati is at
risk and they should locate her and safeguard her. And get me Mkoll on the
link. He’s my sharpest eye.”
Gaunt paused. “And get me Larkin too.”
“Holiness! Your holiness!” Domor ran across the yard to where the Beati
stood. Milo was with her. She seemed to be staring at the sky.
Domor had to shout to make himself heard over the bombardment rippling
through the nearby streets.
“Another vox-signal! From Marshal Biagi this time. He repeats Colonelcommissar
Gaunt’s instructions. We must make our way to Old Hive. It’s
imperative! Holiness?”
“I think she understands,” said Milo. The ground shook as a tank round
demolished a commercial property not seventy metres away. “We can’t stay
out here much longer anyway.”
Sabbat shivered, as if the night air was cold. In truth, it was sweltering hot
from the raging firestorms.
“What is it?” Milo asked.
“He’s coming. The endgame is on us.”
“Who is she talking about?” Domor asked Milo.
Milo shook his head. “We have to go to Old Hive now, Sabbat,” Milo
said. “They’re waiting for us. They need us.”
The Beati turned and looked at him with a half-smile. Sometimes, like now
with the flame-light starkly side-lighting her features, she had a terrible,
terrifying aspect.
“Soon,” she assured. “One last venture. We must get to the agridomes.”
Out on the bare wastes of the Great Western Obsidae, the night was a hard,
dry sub-zero, cut by merciless winds from the outer zones. Phospha lamps
glowed and swung in the wind, coldly illuminating the row upon row of
empty landers and transport ships. Their mouth hatches were open, pointing
south.
There, distantly, the Civitas lay, submerged in the murk and flash of war.
The orange glow of the firestorms lit the low sky.
Thrusters whining and cycling hard a single lander, more massively
armoured than the rest, came in low, sheeting up dust waves more fiercely
than the desert winds. Its Locust escort turned and banked away. Burners
flared blue. Hydraulic landing claws extended, and the battle transport
settled like a giant mosquito.
The ramps opened. Light shone out Crews of slave-carls spewed from the
hatches, followed by a formal marching block of Retinue in full armour. The
Retinue, five hundred strong, divided with parade ground precision, swung
their weapons to shoulder in a perfectly synchronised movement, and formed
two lines of honour guard.
Etrodai, his changeling blade skinned and hungry, strode down the ramp
and He followed.
He was dressed for war in gleaming beetle-black armour. His face was
masked by His antlered helmet. The Retinue murmured their moan of respect.
Enok Innokenti, Magister, Warlord, chosen disciple of the Archon, set foot
on the dusty soil of Herodor. He raised His arms in salutation.
The Retinue screamed His name.
TWELVE
IN THE NAME OF SABBAT
“As the Emperor protects, so must we.”
—Ibram Gaunt
Some of the men in Corbec’s platoon were getting vocal with their
complaints, and Corbec could half understand why.
“When the feth do we get to fall back?” said Bewl.
“For feth’s sake, why are we still out here?” said Cown.
“We have a job to do, boys,” Corbec assured them. Instructions had been
simple. Find the Beati and get her back to Old Hive. And watch out in
particular for the really bad things. Of which there were nine, apparently.
They weren’t fighting anymore. They were sneaking. Cloaked up, stealthy,
using every shred of Tanith woodcraft to edge through the splintered ruins of
Guild Slope. They dodged advancing Blood Pact units, and hid while
crimson tanks grumbled past, lamps blazing. There was the odd fire-fight or
three, when circumstances demanded, but then it was strictly hit and run.
They were working the shadows and staying alive.
Corbec was glad to have Mkvenner back with him. He’d lost count of the
Blood Pact throats Ven had sliced that night as he led them at point. There
was no getting away from the fact that they were all going to die here on
Herodor, one way or another. That was the way the odds were stacked, and
not even Varl or Feygor would have given better. But by feth, they were going
to make a good account of themselves.
His camo-cloak pulled up around him like a hood, Corbec scuttled
forward at a signal from Ven, passing Orrin, Cown, Cole and Irvinn in cover.
He reached the street turn and used the shadows cast by a burning community
hall to blend into the scenery. He raised a hand, made a signal of his own.
Veddekin, Ponore, Sillo, Androby, and Brown sprinted up on his heels and
vanished into the shot-up print shop to his left. Then Surch and Loell moved
up smartly, lugging the .50 and its panniers of ammo.
Corbec scurried over to fresh cover. He was quiet for a big man. Rerval
and Roskil covered him, and then slipped in behind him.
The three of them were running, in file, down to the end of the block. A
tank, or something similar, had flattened the building there and left nothing
but ragged rockcrete sections, sprouting the broken strands of their internal
metal reinforcement.
Mkvenner reappeared, jogging back to them, light on his feet.
“Some kind of covered market to the left there. The road to the right is
blocked. We could carry on down the hill if we follow that side street.”
“Can we go through the market?” Corbec asked.
“I haven’t scoped it.”
“Let’s try.” Corbec rose, and flashed a finger signal back. Then he and Ven
were running forward again, with Brown, Cole, Sillo and Roskil behind
them.
The covered market had once had a glass roof, but the Shockwaves from
the shelling had brought it down. Some wooden screens remained. The
produce shops and trader barrows inside were all locked up and shuttered.
“Doesn’t look promising,” Ven said.
Corbec nodded, and turned to go back. Then he stopped. He had smelt
something. It was faint, very faint almost masked by the rich stink of smoke
and burning fuel.
Something like cinnamon. He knew that smell, vividly. That particular
reek. From Hagia, the Doctrinopolis… what was it now? Four years ago?
He’d never forget it. It was in his nightmares still. A moment in his life no
amount of good nights’ sleep could wear away. Him and the poor boy Yael.
Prisoners of the Infardi. And that thing, that monster in human form. The one
who’d butchered Yael just to hear him scream.
It couldn’t be! That bastard was long dead…
Corbec breathed in again: cinnamon, sweat, decay. Faint, but lingering.
“Cover me,” he said to Ven, and ignored the askance look the scout gave
him.
Corbec advanced into the market lasrifle low and ready. He took care with
every step. The floor was covered in chips of broken glass from the roof. On
the edge of his nerves and as fine as any Tanith scout Corbec made no sound.
He prowled in, checking from side to side. Twice, he jumped at shadows
and almost discharged his weapon. The smell grew stronger.
Corbec saw movement. Low down, under a trader’s barrow. He circled,
switching his lasrifle to a single-handed grip as he fished out a lamp-pack.
He edged round the cart, and saw there were two kids hiding between the
wheels. Little, hunched up kids. One of them was waving his hand beside his
head, as if he was trying to fan the close air. Corbec came around further, and
clicked on the pack. He lit the kids up with a hard-light beam and they didn’t
flinch. He saw their faces.
“Oh feth!” he growled.
Something hit him from behind, a heavy, powerful mass that reeked of
sweat and cinnamon. Corbec lurched forward and crashed into the cart,
overturning it.
The weight was on him. He felt a knifing pain in his left shoulder.
Corbec yowled and smacked back with his elbow. The weight reduced,
and he rolled, groping for his rifle. He blundered into the kids… though from
his brief glimpse of them he knew they were not kids… and felt them grab at
him.
“Colonel? Sir?” Corbec could hear Ven shouting. He heard men running
forward over the glass litter. A lasrifle fired.
Mkvenner came charging in, with Brown and Cole beside him. Roskil and
Sillo were close behind. Cole had already fired, shredding the shutters of a
produce shop behind the shuffling twins. The twins seized each other and
switched their sightless heads around in unison, looking at Cole. The
concussive psi-wave hit him and broke every bone in his body. His limp,
flopping form flew backwards into the air like a weighted sack, up and out
through the market’s roof, snapping a support truss with a sickening crunch.
Corbec leapt up, and switched around. He saw a flash of green silk and a
glint of exposed fangs.
“Sin!” he screamed, and slammed out a fist that met Pater Sin in the face.
The huge Infardi crumpled and crashed away, smashing over another two
carts. Buttons and beads spilled across the floor.
“Pater Sin!” Corbec yelled again, and dived at the rolling bulk. The twins
heard his cry and switched their heads towards him. The psi-shock caught
him a glancing blow and tumbled him head over heels into the shutters of a
shop on the far side of the aisle. He broke several slats, and fell onto the
ground.
Mkvenner leapt onto Sin as he tried to get up. They grappled furiously, and
the scout brought him down again. Sin slammed out a tattooed arm and
smacked Mkvenner sideways.
The twins opened their mouths and the buzzing sound gushed out. Brown
and Roskil skidded to a halt, and swayed, blood gushing from their nostrils
and ears. Roskil raised his lasrifle and shot Brown between the eyes. Then
he swung round drunkenly and aimed at Sillo, who was backing away in
terror.
There was a blurt of las-fire on auto. Mkvenner was up on one knee,
blasting. The twins slammed back against the wall together, and slid down,
leaving sticky swipes of blood behind them. Roskil, brain-fried, collapsed as
they died.
Howling, Pater Sin threw himself at Corbec. His lethal implants gnashed
and bit at the Ghost’s neck. Corbec fended Sin off with his left arm, groping
with his right to find something to use against the maniac. Something.
Anything.
He got his fingers around something metallic and hard. He hoped to feth it
was his warknife. He pulled it and stabbed it into the side of Sin’s skull. It
didn’t penetrate, but the blow cracked Sin back for a second.
It wasn’t Corbec’s straight silver at all. It was a tube-charge.
Corbec swore and flinched as Sin came in again. His massive body pinned
Corbec, and his augmetic fangs opened to rip his enemy’s throat out.
Corbec jammed the tube into the yawning mouth as Sin bit down. His razor
teeth clamped solidly into the tube’s metal casing. Sin tried to pull away.
Corbec got his legs up under Sin’s torso and kicked out, throwing the heretic
backwards off him.
A torn strand of det tape remained between Corbec’s fingers.
“That’s for Yael, feth-face!” Corbec yelled as he threw himself flat.
The tube-charge anchored in Pater Sin’s teeth detonated.
Spattered in Sin’s vaporised remains, Corbec rose. He hurried over to
Mkvenner, who’d been thrown flat by the blast.
“Got the bastard,” Corbec said.
Caffran suddenly realised what he was looking at He’d taken point down a
side street, and was hunched in cover as the Ghosts moved up behind him.
The view ahead was dark and empty, heavily shadowed by the bulk of an
aqueduct that ran overhead and down the slope into the lower city where the
night was firelit orange.
Caffran was looking for movement at street level, but he was distracted by
a motion up in the shadows of the aqueduct. Roosting birds, he thought and
then remembered that he’d not seen any bird life on Herodor.
He stared up. A pale shape seemed to be moving along the outside of the
aqueduct, insubstantial as smoke.
“Stand by,” he voxed. “There’s something—”
And he realised what he was seeing. Two loxatl, sleek and fluid as fish in
water, racing along the sheer brickwork, about to cross right over their
position.
“Hostiles! Eleven o’clock!” he yelled and opened fire up into the shadows
of the arch. The gunfire rolled in the echoing space and his shots, bright and
furious, lit up the bricks beside creatures. One immediately disappeared up
over the top of the aqueduct, and the other one came down the support pier at
a stupendous rate, its long body undulating and glinting. About three metres
from the street, it propelled itself over onto the facing wall of the hab
opposite, its dewclaws allowing it to skitter up the vertical surface.
Cafrran ran forward, firing again. Feygor, Leyr and Dunik were up beside
him, but they hadn’t seen what he had seen.
“Caff?”
“Loxatl! Feth, up there!”
Cafrran shot at the front of the hab, though in truth he couldn’t see the thing
clearly anymore. Dunik and Feygor blasted with him, blindly following his
lead. The Ghosts had a particular revulsion for the loxatl kind.
The thing reappeared, lower than Caffran was estimating. Little augmetic
servo-limbs in its weapons harness clacked its blaster round and it fired.
The first two flechette rounds hit the wall behind Feygor making deep
holes haloed by hundreds of lesser micro-impacts. The third atomised
Dunik’s head and shoulders in a bloody vapour.
Caffran and Feygor threw themselves flat. Leyr, cut along the hand and arm
by stray barbs, yelped and stumbled.
They dragged him into cover. “Down! Stay the feth down!” Cafrran yelled,
seeing Rawne and a half dozen other Ghosts rushing up the street to assist
them. The loxatl’s cannon repeated its distinctive rattling cough and hailed
splinters along the street wall at head height. Someone screamed.
Rawne was on his hands and knees behind an abandoned ground car and
glanced up in horror at the huge, ragged holes the xenos weapon was
punching in the wall above him. Each impact was actually a thousand razor
barbs hitting simultaneously.
“Where the feth is it?” he yelled.
Caffran couldn’t see. “Taring us, about two floors up,” he voxed. “There’s
another one gone over the top of the aqueduct. For feth’s sake, someone
cover that angle!”
Fifty metres back, Kolea and Criid heard his signal and glanced at each
other. The whining cough of loxatl cannons had a particular resonance for
them both. Ouranberg. Criid in trouble. Kolea effectively giving up his life to
save her.
As if reading her thoughts, Kolea said, “Not this time.”
They doubled back under the aqueduct, hunting for the second creature On
the far side, visibility was better. The street was well lit by the amber glow
of the firestorms. Guns raised, twitchy, they fanned forward, trying to hug
cover. Criid and Kolea first… Jajjo… Skeen, Pozetine… Kenfeld.
Jajjo saw firelight reflecting off inhuman eyes clouded by protective han
lids. He dived forward as flechette rounds shattered the cobbles around him.
Several barbs sliced into his calves and shins, but he managed to land and
roll, and came up firing.
Jajjo’s las-fire peppered the wall where the thing had been, but sharp
dewclaws and chillingly nimble reflexes had propelled the thing ten metres
up the front facade of the tenement and along under the edge of the roof.
Criid saw it go, and fired at it, Kenfeld joining in.
“Gak, it’s so fething fast!” she wailed.
“I think—” Kenfeld began and then suddenly wasn’t beside her anymore.
She flinched. Her face was sticky and wet. It was Kenfeld’s blood. His
mangled body had been thrown five metres backwards, as hard and fast as if
a speeding truck had run into it.
Criid ducked into cover and started to recell her weapon with shaking
hands. She heard las-shots, the answering cough of the blaster, and then
footsteps running. Gol Kolea threw himself down beside her.
“Where is it?” she asked.
“Up to the left, but moving. You okay?”
She nodded. Her earpiece was ringing with calls and alerts from the rest
of the squad, trying to move up but pinned down by the mercilessly switching
fire. Kolea made ready to run out again, but she grabbed his arm and pulled him
back.
“No heroics now,” she said. “We’ve only just got you back.”
“That an order?”
“Yes, and—”
“And what?”
“I want you alive when we’re done. We need to talk about… about your
children.”
He looked at her strangely. “My kids died in the hive-war, Tona. My wife
too. The only children we need to worry about these days are yours.”
“But—”
“Yours,” he said emphatically. “The Emperor protects, and when he’s
busy, Tona Criid performs miracles for him. It’s enough to know they’re alive
and loved. More than I could ever have hoped for.”
He embraced her, and held her tight for a second. Then he scooped up his
weapon and ran. The cannon coughed and roared.
On the other side of the aqueduct, Rawne was running too. Three more of his
platoon were messily dead now, but the loxatl had stopped shooting for a
moment. He figured it had gone up over the roof of the hab.
He ran right across the street and came up against the front wall of the
tenement, pressing his back to it, edging along. The street was quiet Thin
wisps of smoke drifted down it. Across the road, he could see Ghosts
creeping forward behind cover.
Rawne’s nostrils were suddenly assailed by a rancid stink of milk. Milk
and mint.
His shoulders pressed to the wall, he tilted his head back and looked
straight up. The loxatl gazed down at him. It was directly above him, about
three metres up the wall, head down, snuffling its wattled snout. Its augmetic
harness clicked and aimed the cannon’s barrel into his eyes.
“Well, shit,” said Rawne.
From across the street, Banda’s hot-shot hit it in the base of the tail and
blew it off the wall. It crashed down beside Rawne in a shower of shattered
bricks, thrashing its sinuous body in agony. Fluid leaked out of its lipless
mouth. Rawne pressed the muzzle of his lasrifle into the exposed folds of its
throat and fired.
“Nice decoy work, baby,” Banda said, sauntering out of cover with her
long-las over her shoulder. “Ha fething ha,” said Rawne.
Chto brood leader was dead. Reghh had heard his subsonic pain-wails.
Anger-hunger swamped his mind, and his gleaming skin began to pulse with
grief-codes. Iridescent patterns flashed along his snaking body. He scuttled
down a wall, across a stretch of pavement, and then up a side wall into the
next alley. These mammals were not the target. They were delaying him and
making him waste shots.
Loxatl senses were dull tools. Out of water, their vision, hearing and smell
were poor. Taste and vibration were their primary skills. Reghh could feel
the mammal soldiers running up along the street he’d just left, looking for
him. He could feel their footsteps, their mouth noises, their heartbeats and
their lung-puffs. He could taste their fear-sweat and skin-scents.
He started to scurry back down the length of the wall, moving south, when
pain slammed into his torso. White-cold, brutal pain. He staggered, doublelids
blinking.
The mammal wrenched his rifle back and tugged the long, silver bayonet
out How had Reghh not tasted him or known he was there?
Reghh coiled round. The ground was awash with the life-fluid draining out
of him. He dimly saw the mammal.
The mammal had no taste. No taste at all. As if he was somehow newborn:
pure and as yet unsoured by the rank flavours accumulated in their filthy skins
during their lives.
How could that be? The mammal was full grown.
Reghh tried to turn around enough to bring his harness weapon to bear. The
pain in his belly was too great The mammal-with-no-taste lunged again.
Gol Kolea rammed the bayonet into the thing’s twitching body twice more
to make sure it was dead. Loxatl blood dripped off the straight silver
clamped to his rifle’s barrel. Dark spirals of colour flashed up and down the
animal’s gleaming hide and then it went a dull white.
Breathing hard, Kolea tapped his micro-bead. “Sarge?” he said. “I got it.”
The strangest thing. In till his years of kill-hunts, he’d never had this feeling
before. He was being hunted.
Skarwael shifted silently through the abandoned avenues of the Guild
Slope, invisible to all. The Imperial city towers rose before him, but the
neighbourhood was quiet and dead. The humans had fled, leaving ruin in
their wake. Rumbling, like a sinister threat, the invading host was twenty
minutes behind him.
Skarwael had preyed a few times on his approach to the hives, not because
he had to but because he was thirsty for pain. Herodor was smashed. In less
than a day, the hives would burn and the Magister would have his victory.
The task remained. She was elusive, this martyr. That made the hunt all the
sweeter.
And this strange feeling. It made the whole enterprise rewarding.
Skarwael had accepted the task on the basis of the price the Magister was
offering — a fortune in territory and inner transition metals, and a tolerance
treaty between his kabal and the Archon Gaur. But this thrill now was reward
enough. The hunter was hunted.
He’d not felt like this since his bitter years as a novitiate, when Lord Kaah
had hunted them all in the miserable vaults of the murderdromes to hone their
skills.
What could it be out there? Certainly no human. No human could ever hope
to best the stealth and guile of a mandrake.
Skarwael melted into shadow, and doubled back. Like a phantom, he
flowed through the shadows of a burned-out hab and came out onto the street.
Darkness swam about him, unnaturally extending his flesh-cloak, bonding
him to the night.
Where are you, he wondered?
The street was empty. Patchy fires burned in several buildings. The stiff
corpses of Imperial soldiers decorated the ground. A wounded man, a PDF
private, ran past him up the street, terrified, hoping to reach the towers
before the gate hatches locked. The human didn’t even see Skarwael, even
though he was standing in the middle of the thoroughfare. The oblivious
human passed so close by Skarwael could have reached out with his boline
and cut his throat.
Still that feeling.
Skarwael turned, became brick, became glass, became stone, shifting his
visual form against the backdrop behind him. His unseen adversary was
close by. He could feel it His pallid skin prickled. Behind him? No! To the
left…
He passed through shadow and firelight bending light and sound around
himself as he moved. His chameleon powers segued him into walls and
doorways, like a spectre from the afterlife.
There! Skarwael turned and flowed back through the night. At last his
peerless skills as a stalker had paid off. There was his adversary, huddled
down behind a railing, trying to hide.
You were good, Skarwael conceded. A pleasure to hunt, a pleasure to test
my skill against. But you are no match for a mandrake. Don’t move. I will
honour you with a slow, delicious death.
Skarwael lunged with his sacred knife. The boline stabbed between the
railings and speared through lifeless cloth.
Surprised, Skarwael dragged the doth through the bars and sniffed it. A
cloak, an empty cloak, made of some camouflage material. He turned and
saw the rifle aimed at him.
“You’re good,” said Mkoll grudgingly.
The single las-round hit the mandrake between the eyes.
THIRTEEN
THE LAST HOURS
“Nine is still one.”
—message written in Soric’s hand
Closure required the gene-print of the first officiary. Leger was frightened,
and had to be talked through the procedure, but Biagi was patient.
“Are they all in? Are they?” Leger mumbled.
Cannon teams guarded the slopes of the hive gate below. Gaunt had
already checked in Criid’s platoon, Rawne’s and Obel’s. “Wait,” he said.
Rolling gunfire was hitting Old Hive’s base level precincts. Waves of
archenemy units, most of them motorised, stormed in towards the towers at
ground level, and the air assault had redoubled.
It was close to dawn.
A string of shot-up carriers rumbled in under the gate, and thundered down
the slip road into Old Hive’s vast entry halls. As soon as they stopped, they
popped their hatches. Domor’s platoon scrambled out. The Beati and Milo
were with them.
“Sabbat,” said Gaunt, bowing. “We were fearful for your life.”
“I’m sorry for that Ibram. But I’m here now. Your Ghosts have kept me
safe.”
“Gaunt?” Biagi yelled from the walkway above “Now?”
Gaunt paused and consulted his data-slate. They were all inside Old Hive
now, all the surviving Regiment Civitas, the PDF and life company. All that
could be expected anyway.
On his own list, the Tanith list, one unit was missing. Sergeant Skerral’s,
number nineteen, last seen in a firefight with the death brigades on Neshion
Street.
“Sir?” Corbec gazed at Gaunt. “I think we have to draw the line now.”
Gaunt nodded.
“Seal the gates!” Biagi yelled. Leger placed his hand on the gene-reader
plate and declared his authority. The massive blast shutters of the Old Hive
gates clanged into place.
Nineteenth platoon were about five hundred metres from Old Hive’s north
entrance when they saw the gates close.
Skerral stopped in his tracks, and pulled the men up. Half his unit were
dead. He ejected a cell from his lasrifle and slammed in a new one.
“Come on,” he said, turning back to face down the slope at the waves of
assault sweeping in. “Let’s see how many we can kill.”
The remnants of nineteenth lasted seventeen minutes from the time the
gates closed. They accounted for one hundred and eighty-nine enemy
casualties. No one witnessed their heroism.
Old Hive, as massive as it was, throbbed under the attack hailing at it from
outside. Many upper levels were on fire. The massed forces of the Magister
slammed against the outer walls again and again.
Word came through that hive tower two had been taken. Innokenti himself
was there, receiving civilian sacrifices.
The main gates of Old Hive fell at mid morning. The death brigades
flowed in, fighting street by street and compartment by compartment to
overrun the tower.
Gaunt walked down the staircase into the Holy Balneary in the base of Old
Hive. The thousands of electrocandles flickered and twinkled. Most of the
notables were already assembled below at the poolside. Lugo, Biagi, Leger,
Kilosh and the ayatanis, Kaldenbach, the chief astropaths, the senior
ecclesiarchs.
The service had been the Beati’s idea. A final blessing for her loyal forces
before the end came.
Gaunt felt resigned to it all. They were just hours from death now.
Ferocious hive fighting tore through the outer levels of the tower. Parts of the
external superstructure were beginning to collapse under intense
bombardment.
Even so, he’d allowed just a bare minimum of Ghosts to attend. Fighting
the enemy took priority over any sacred blessing. The only Ghosts who he
had permitted to accompany him marched in a double file down the steps
behind him. The Tanith flame troopers. They carried their tanks and hoses
proudly. Biagi had personally requested their attendance He wanted to
honour them, and recognise the vital role they’d played, despite the ancient
Civitas laws.
Gaunt ushered them onto the poolside, and they formed up in neat ranks.
Some of the city officiaries and life company officers regarded the dirty
flame-troopers with disdain.
“Ignore them,” Gaunt said.
The Bead, encased in her golden armour, stood thigh deep in the pool,
proclaiming the devotional of Kiodrus. Milo waited nearby, with the temple
adepts, at the top of the bath steps. Sabbat’s voice echoed through the warm,
damp air. She praised the forces that had drawn about her on Herodor, and
mentioned the officers and unit commanders by name. Seventy per cent of the
names she spoke were the names of dead men.
Gaunt, standing to attention with his troopers, started to blank out her
words. The air was warm, and he was filled with a sense of mortality. This
was all just fine talk. Battle awaited them, above in the hive, and it would be
their last. Gaunt found his attention drifting to a pulse of bubbles that rippled
the water at the far end of the balneary pool from Sabbat. Some kind of vent.
More bubbles. Bigger, more violent. “Beati—” Gaunt began, breaking
rank to step forward.
Karess erupted from the balneary pool.
His hull was rank and filthy from his passage through the deep places
under the Civitas. His weapon limbs swung up and started to fire. A heavy
bolter cannon and a plasma gun.
Horrified panic seized the congregation in the Holy Balneary. Priests and
soldiers scattered in all directions, some slipping on the wet stone. No one
quite believed a Chaos dreadnought could suddenly reveal itself like this.
Karess strode forward through the swirling water of the pool, weaponlimbs
firing, broadcasting obscenities. Basalt chips spattered out of the pool
side. Bolter rounds slaughtered five temple adepts and three life company
officers. Kilosh was incinerated by a plasma beam. Kaldenbach fell over,
blood pouring from a gut-wound.
Karess advanced onto the pool steps, emerging more fully from the water.
He traversed his hull to target the left side of the bathhouse. His heavy bolter
slammed and roared and the side wall was plastered with blood and
exploded tissue. First Officiary Leger and the civitas master astropath both
ceased to exist in that salvo. Sabbat stumbled up the pool steps and Milo
started to drag her towards the cover of one of the balneary’s massive stone
columns.
Biagi ran to help him, firing his service pistol into the pool. A bolt round
hit him in the chest and threw his ruptured corpse back across the chamber,
knocking several people over as they tried to flee.
One of them was Lord General Lugo.
Shrieking, Lugo tore himself clear of the fallen bodies and rose. The
killing machine was now nearly at the top of the pool steps, setting its first
massive claw-foot on the poolside proper. Milo had got the Beati behind a
pillar and just about everybody else still alive in the room was in cover.
Karess’ sensor augmetics dialled and clicked as it swung its bulk around,
hunting for targets.
Hunting for the target.
It saw Lugo, eyes wild in terror as he staggered backwards. Karess
emitted another stream of strangled obscenity and aimed his bolter.
It didn’t fire A blow had rocked it Spitting filth, it swung its massive iron
torso round to locate the source and felt another strike at its flank.
Gaunt drew back the power blade of Heironymo Sondar and struck again.
The war machine was monumental and vastly powerful, but it was slow and
cumbersome. It fired, but Gaunt was behind it, splashing through the shallow
water at the top of the steps. He lashed out with the sword again and split a
deep gash right through Karess’ rear hull casing.
Karess uttered an electronic squeal, and rocked around with a grinding
dank of gears. The edge of his plasma cannon smashed into Gaunt and hurled
him back into the pool.
The dreadnought turned back, screaming blasphemies, and located the
pillar where the Beati was sheltering.
Clutching his terrible belly wound, Kaldenbach struggled to his knees. He
was only a few metres from the killer. Gasping with pain, he pulled a stick
grenade and rolled it across the flagstones. It came to rest between Karess’
massive foot-claws.
The blast blew the upper part of the pool steps into fragments. It barely
damaged Karess, but it pitched him off his feet The brute machine crashed
backwards into the pool, sheeting water up into the air.
Ghosts ran forward from cover to drag Gaunt up onto the pool’s edge
Coughing, Gaunt gazed back at the seething frenzy of water where the
infuriated Karess was attempting to right himself.
“Brostin! Lubba!” Gaunt spluttered. “Boil the bastard!”
Five Tanith flame-troops ran to the edge of the pool and hosed the water
with liquid fire. In the enclosed stone chamber, the heat was immense. Steam
gouted up. They continued to hose… Brostin, Lubba, Dremmond, Lyse,
Neskon… churning the water into a scalding, bubbling froth.
Karess’ armoured hull was proof against just about anything, but Gaunt’s
sword had sliced a hole in it. Boiling water squirted in, into his casing,
broiling the living vestige inside. Karess sank, his hull lights dimmed, and
went out.
Brostin and his brethren ceased fire and raised their burner-guns. The air
was sweltering hot and thick with steam and smoke. Blood coated almost
every surface of the ancient chamber.
At terrible cost, the last of the nine had been stopped.
In his cell, much further up in Old Hive, Agun Soric felt a sudden rush of
relief. He lay back on his cot, his heart pounding. Then he felt something
twitch in the pocket of his jacket.
“There were times,” Sabbat said quietly, “when I did not think we would get
this far.”
He didn’t know what to say. She seemed to be speaking as if there was
some chance of victory remaining. “Lugo has a ship,” he said. “I doubt very
much if it will survive an escape run, but he wants you aboard it.”
“Do you?”
Gaunt shook his head. “I think there are few chances of you surviving this
war, my Saint, and Lugo’s ship is not one of them. Mkoll has suggested an
escape on foot through the rear of the city basin, into the Southern Ramparts.
It would be hard, but you and a small force might remain alive out there,
hidden.”
“While you keep Innokenti busy with a final stand here?”
“No one else is going to do it. Biagi’s dead, Kaldenbach as good as.
Lugo’s too far gone with fear.”
Gaunt and the Bead sat alone in a debate chamber of the Herodian
Officiate, on the ninth level of Old Hive. Despite the monolithic build of the
city tower around them, they could feel the vibration of warfare tearing
through the lowest districts.
“Ibram?” she smiled. “Did you suppose I had no purpose to play here?”
“If you have a purpose, Sabbat, it is beyond my grasp. I have never
understood why you chose to come to Herodor. You’re too valuable — to us
and to the archenemy. You could have swept our forces to victory on
Morlond. Here, you’ve trapped yourself, for no gain at all. The only ones
you’ve served by coming here are the forces of Chaos. Your death will boost
their morale for years to come.”
“You understand risk, Ibram. Tell me, is it better to risk a little for an easy
victory, or everything for a great one?”
Gaunt laughed sadly. “I can’t see the p—”
“If I had gone to Morlond, Ibram, I would indeed have assured a fast
victory there. But the Crusade would have been lost. Macaroth has
overstretched himself. Innokenti’s flank attack now bites deep into the Khan
Group. The Warmaster and I would have achieved victory on Morlond, only
to see the forces behind us destroyed by counter-attack. We would have been
cut off, and exterminated.”
“So you go to the Khan Group instead? Without any significant forces?”
“How important is Herodor, Ibram?”
“Compared to the major Khan worlds, and the main population centres?
It’s worth is zero.”
“So why is the Magister himself… and such a large portion of his host…
bothering with it?”
Gaunt shrugged. “Because you’re here.”
She nodded. “Innokenti could have won the war outright for Chaos with
one merciless thrust up through the Khan flank. We did not have the forces
available to stop him. But it occurred to me we could distract him entirely
and make him waste vital time on a pointless invasion of a worthless world.”
“You… you used yourself as bait?”
“You said yourself, I’m too valuable. To us and the archenemy. Innokenti
could not ignore me.” She reached into her cloak and produced a data-slate.
“This was received via the astropaths a few minutes before we sealed the
hive gates. I intended to announce it at the ceremony in the balneary, but we
were interrupted.”
Gaunt took the slate and read it. The text had been deciphered from a very
high level encryption. In a final, bloody push, Macaroth’s forces had taken
Morlond. Urlock Gaur was in frantic retreat. It would take time, but Imperial
divisions could now be spared to bolster the defences of the Khan Group
against Innokenti’s attack.
An attack that despite every advantage, had stalled at Herodor.
“By the Golden Throne…!” Gaunt sighed, astonished.
“We may yet die here, Ibram. But we will have died in the name of
victory.”
“Thanks be to the Emperor,” he said.
She rose to her feet. “And if I am to perish here, I would like to make it
count for as much as possible. Milo?”
Milo had been waiting in the chamber’s anteroom. He hurried in and
bowed to her before saluting Gaunt.
“The time has come,” she said. “My message?”
“I took it to tac logis command. They have it loaded into the Civitas public
address system. Just say the word.”
“Now, Milo.”
He adjusted his micro-bead and sent a quick voice command.
The pict message was brief. She had recorded it straight to camera, speaking
quickly and clearly. Every operational public address screen, comm monitor
and view plate in the Civitas broadcast it, and the vocal strand boomed out
of all the vox horns and speakers still wired into the city systems. It lasted
about fifty seconds. Tac logis set it to a looping repeat. For hours, it could be
seen and heard throughout the Civitas Beati, by friend and foe alike.
The broadcast told of the great victory at Morlond. It defiantly declared
that Innokenti’s murderous gamble had failed. It dared him to flee before the
wrath of the God-Emperor overtook him for the brutalities he had heaped
upon Herodor. The final words were as follows:
“All living souls of men still in this city, all people of the Civitas left
alive, know this. With overwhelming forces, the monster Innokenti has
crushed us physically, but he cannot crush our spirit. Our sacrifice has
ensured great victory. Do not die in fear and hiding. Make the price of your
lives dear. The Emperor of Mankind has room for all in his Imperial army.”
They came from the agridomes at first. The archenemy’s ground assault had
ignored the western agri-sectors in its efforts to concentrate on the main
hives. Blood Pact field observers on the invader’s western flank suddenly
saw figures pouring from the agridomes in their thousands.
Children of the Beati. The pilgrim mass.
Despite the losses they had suffered in the short but ferocious war so far,
they still numbered in their hundreds of thousands. The giant agridomes had
offered them shelter when the city started to fall. They were men and women
who had come to Herodor without really knowing why, except that the Beati
had called them.
And now she called them again, directly, through the broadcast.
Some had captured enemy weapons, or PDF ordnance, some had
horticultural implements or broken pipes or staves of wood. Some had
nothing but their own bare hands.
Thousands of them died, miserably outclassed by the weapons and
equipment of the enemy host. But they did not falter for a moment.
An hour after they first appeared to unleash their holy rage into the
Magister’s legions, similar tides began to flow from hive tower one and hive
tower three, and from public shelters and basements through the Guild Slope
and the low town.
The Civitas Beati, crushed almost to death by Enok Innokenti, turned like a
mortally wounded animal in a trap and bit out at the hunter.
Agun Soric hammered his fists against the door of his cell. His hands were
bloody and swollen from his efforts, and left smears of blood on the steel.
“Please!” he yelled. “Please! You have to let me out! I need to warn her! I
need to warn her!”
No one answered. At this late hour, with the city falling, there was in truth
no one left on duty in the detention block to hear him anyway.
He screamed and hammered again, tears coursing down his craggy face.
The open shell case, and its fold of blue paper, lay on the cot behind him.
FOURTEEN
SABBAT MARTYR
“Know him for what he truly is. A killer.”
—message written in Soric’s hand
For the first hour or so of the fight, Anton Alphant had used a pistol looted
from an enemy corpse, but then they’d found a PDF carrier abandoned at the
side of one of the approach streets to hive tower one, and they’d recovered
half a dozen lasrifles from it.
It had a wire stock instead of the pressed metal one he’d been used to in
his Guard days, but apart from that it was shockingly familiar.
Night, wild with firestorms and a monumental roar of war, had engulfed
the Civitas, and Alphant found himself caught up in the bloodiest fighting he
had ever known, his former days of soldiering included. He did his best to
try and make sense of the street combat and to guide the pilgrim forces with
him through.
There was no formal structure to the pilgrim army. It was essentially a
gigantic mob. But the Beati had come to them in the agridomes, drawing men
like Alphant out of the crowd, and telling the pilgrims to look to them for
leadership. Most already did. Sabbat had unerringly picked on those people
who had some military background, or on men or women who had already
become the natural leaders of pilgrim bands.
They had no plan as such… except to throw themselves against the enemy.
Alphant tried to rally his part of the zealot tide towards Old Hive, where the
Beati was said to be under siege.
Her life was all that mattered.
Etrodai had never known Him so deranged by rage. The Magister’s fury was
so great that Etrodai even feared for his own life. Howling, a blinding sphere
of crackling corposant around Him, Enok Innokenti drove the Retinue and
three of the Blood Pact’s veteran death-brigades into the bowels of Old
Hive, through hallways and gallery levels shattered by fighting and littered
with the bodies of the slain.
Hatchway by hatchway, hall by hall, they ground into the failing defences
of the tower city. At the forefront, Etrodai swept his changeling blade through
PDF troopers, Imperial Guardsmen and frantic civilian fighters.
Over a hundred thousand Blood Pact soldiers, along with armoured
vehicles, were now inside Old Hive, spreading like wildfire through the
lower levels. Hundreds of thousands more massed outside in the ruins of the
high town as the city burned behind them.
There were reports of counter attacks to the flank, but Etrodai was sure
they couldn’t be right There were no other Imperial forces here on Herodor
to stage such attacks.
The saint’s defiant broadcast had driven the Magister to His pitch of rage.
He wanted her. He would kill her Himself.
Her life was all that mattered.
Just before midnight, a death brigade managed to mine two central power
generators in the sub-ground levels of Old Hive, mainly in an effort to shut
off the continued broadcasts of the saint’s message, which so maddened their
master. The blast tore out two hive levels, and caused a great internal
collapse that killed thousands. Power was cut on eighteen city levels above
Where the slaughter raged in the lower levels, the halls and hive
thoroughfares became like infernal caves, lit only by flames and the flash of
weapons fire. Fires burned out of control with the suppression systems cut,
and smoke collected in the uncirculating airspaces.
Innokenti and his vanguard swept through it all, lit by the glittering fires of
his psyker malice and by the lethal ribbons of energy that were his bloodrage
made manifest. The invaders surged in behind them.
In the cell block high above, darkness fell. Soric hoarse and exhausted,
waited for the secondary systems to kick in, but none did.
He wedged his hands against the cell door and started to pull at it. If the
power had comprehensively failed, then the mag-locks would have failed
too. The door refused to budge. He tried again, snorting with effort, and at last
the steel plate began to slide back in its groove. Soric pulled until he could
get his bloodied fingers into the gap and grab more purchase.
He slid the cell door open and staggered out. The cell dock was dark.
Stumbling and groping, he made his way out and down into an assembly yard.
The main gates of the detention unit were open. Outside, the hive
thoroughfare was pitch black and abandoned. He felt a rumbling from below,
distant. The air was stale and smelled of smoke. Through the big riser vents
in the thoroughfare he could hear noises echoing upwards through the vast
structure of the hive.
Sounds of carnage and destruction, sounds of death.
Soric limped down the empty hallway in search of a stairwell.
The Magister’s arrival on the Great Concourse, a vast public space on the
ninth level of Old Hive, was announced by the stalk-tanks that came blasting
up the three great ashlar staircases that ascended from the transit terminals
and ornamental gardens below. Such was the scale of the staircases, the war
machines were able to climb five or six abreast, with Retinue and Blood
Pact troopers rushing on foot in their wake, firing up at the Imperials dug in
around the ornate basalt rails of the concourse level. The vast space was
three hive levels deep, and the massive glass pendant lights that hung from
the arched roof had been dark since the power failure. Great windows thirty
metres high overlooked the staircases and lit the concourse with the glow of
the burning city outside.
Major Udol, now ranking commander of the planetary forces, had
assembled the last of his armour on the concourse, and their guns met the
stalk-tanks as they came up from the steps. Shell blasts tore across the
pavements, hurling stone slabs and men into the air. Pulse-lasers spat their
pumping streams through the hellish gloom, ripping open the fronts of the
buildings lining the concourse and shattering the huge obsidian sculptures that
hung down from the roof. Class images of the aquila and other Imperial
crests crashed down in avalanches of glass shards, exploding into fragments
like falling ice.
The Magister’s forces surged up onto the concourse.
Gaunt had drawn up half the Tanith regiment and the last of the life
company behind the armour for this stand. All remaining forces were
occupied on other levels, meeting other invasions, but this, Gaunt knew, was
the key.
She had told him so. She had felt the wrath of Innokenti approaching.
Udol’s armour rolled back slowly across the pavements, crunching over
the vast heaps of broken glass, tiling as it went. They took heavy losses, but
not a single stalk-tank made it more than twenty metres from the head of the
steps. Udol’s gentle retreat was designed to lure a good portion of enemy
infantry up onto the concourse, where there was no cover.
“In the Emperor’s name… now!” Gaunt signalled, and his infantry strength
emerged from around the sides of the huge public space, firing as it came The
first fifty seconds were a blistering massacre The concourse lit up as bright
as day with the las-weapon discharge. Hundreds of Blood Part and Retinue
troopers were cut down or blown apart. Then the archenemy rallied, and the
firefight began in earnest. Still the Imperials punished them.
“Hold the line! Hold cover!” Gaunt ordered. His men had the full
advantage of the buildings on either side of the pavements, and the still
advancing enemy had nothing but open space.
Gaunt saw a ripple of light at the top of the steps. Unearthly, malevolent
light, crackling like lightning. In horror, he realised that the Beati and the life
company had broken cover formation and were charging onto the concourse
towards it. The Beati herself was lit up in a halo of green fire.
Alone, despite that great power suffusing her, she would die.
“Ghosts of Tanith!” he yelled, raising his sword. “Charge!”
Only on Balhaut, in that hell of war, had Gaunt known pitched fighting on
such a great scale. Like seas dashing, the waves of soldiers tore into one
another, stabbing and firing. Flamers roared. The force of the clash made the
ancient concourse shake. Gaunt ran with his men, laspistol blasting in his left
hand, power sword scything in his right. Within seconds, he had been hit
twice, glancing shots to his body, and a half dozen tears had ripped through
his clothes. The sword of Heironymo Sondar bit through Blood Pact veterans
who lunged at him with fixed bayonets, and hacked open the dark blue
armour of the Magister’s elite troopers, savage brutes with bulbous insectoid
goggles.
He tried to find the Saint. His face was wet with blood and his breath was
rancid in his throat. The din around him was so immense he was deafened.
Every second, every part of a second, he was striking and moving, dodging,
stabbing, caught up at the heart of a combat melee so feral it seemed to be an
echo from the barbaric wars of the past.
He saw Rawne and Caffran for a moment blasting into the enemy as they
ran forward. Feygor, kneeling over a fallen Ghost and firing on auto. Varl,
Criid, Obel, Domor, Meryn, their men around them as they charged into the
enemy mass. He saw Daur shoot a Blood Pact officer through the head. He
saw Brostin spraying flamer-fire into a collapsing pack of Retinue troops. He
saw straight silver and blood and courage.
He saw men he’d known for almost seven years fight and die.
The men and women of Verghast, true Ghosts all, stalwart and brave.
The men of Tanith, staunchest warriors he’d ever known, who so surely
deserved to live forever.
Gaunt knew war was fickle, and seldom let a warrior choose his place of
death. But this, this was enough. As good, as worthy, as honorable, as any he
could have chosen.
The flare of unholy radiance was close to him, and he hacked through
closing ranks of Retinue soldiers to reach it. His pistol had gone. Only the
charged blade of his sword remained. A las-round creased his cheek but he
ignored the burning pain and took the head off a member of the Retinue,
leaping forward into the lightning.
Surrounded by the heaped dead, Innokenti stood before him. The Magister,
more vile and wretched than anything Gaunt could have imagined, was
locked sword to sword with the Beati.
Every blow they exchanged, every strike, crashed like thunder. Sparks
flew. Shockwaves from the meeting blades threw men around them — friend
and foe alike — off their feet Hideous corposant writhed and seared around
the Magister. Cold green fire, in the form of a great eagle with its wings
unfurled, lit up the Saint.
Gaunt charged forward, his boots slipping on the blood-wet stone.
A daemon sprang at him, blocking his path. The beast was huge. It was
cased in the blue-black armour of the Retinue, but its head was bare, the pink
flesh grievously marked with ritual scars. Its mouth and nose were hidden
behind an augmetic grille and its eyes were glowing yellow slits. It wielded
a ghastly sword of serrated bone which grew out of its right fist. The flesh of
that fist had peeled back, exposing grey finger bones that were fused into the
long blade. It swung at Gaunt.
Blood saved him. His boot slipped and he fell. The bone-blade whistled
over his head and Gaunt rolled before it could slice back. He jumped to his
feet and parried the daemon’s sword as it came at him, and then drove hard
with a thrust that the beast turned aside.
They circled amid the whirling carnage, trading blows with all their
strength. Gaunt could no longer see the Beati.
Only a greenish light in the air suggested she was still alive. Desperately,
Gaunt lunged, but the daemon hooked the strike away, countering with a thrust
that juddered Gaunt’s power sword down.
His guard was open. The bone-blade came at his throat.
A las-round smacked into the side of the daemon’s neck, and a second
ripped open its shoulder guard. It stumbled away from Gaunt, turning.
Brin Milo charged forward, power-cell spent, and rammed his straight
silver up to the hilt in the daemon’s chest.
Eaten by the beast’s acid blood, the blade snapped off. Milo staggered
back. With a wordless scream, Gaunt swung around and put his power blade
clean through the thing’s neck.
Etrodai, life-ward of the Magister, fell dead, his changeling blade
crumbling to dust.
Gaunt and Milo turned and ran towards the Beati. Living fire was sizzling
around her, and pouring like burning oil out across the pavements of the
concourse.
The fire was pouring from the disembowelled corpse of Enok Innokenti.
“Holy Terra…” Gaunt stammered.
Sabbat rose, the sightless, gaping head of the Magister dangling from her
raised fist.
“In the name of the Emperor!” she yelled. The luminous aquila around her
flared to three times its size, snapping and beating at the high roof.
The sound of her voice was so clear, so loud, it blew out the great
windows of the concourse in a vast blizzard of glass.
To a man, every archenemy warrior on Herodor shrieked.
Where he had been hard-pressed just a minute before, Corbec now found
himself facing an empty hallway. Weary and nervous, he edged his forces
forward, dealing through to the western gate of the hive.
Something had most definitely happened. The enemy forces had been all
over them and now they were in flight.
“Rerval? What’s the story, son?”
Rerval shook his head. A huge and devastating rush of psyk-noise had just
burned out all the comm channels and fused every vox-set in the hive area.
“Could be a trick,” said Mkvenner.
Corbec nodded. “Hold it here. The fethers don’t give up that easily. We’ve
got a breathing space at least.”
Mkvenner nodded. He rounded up the Ghosts and PDF in the immediate
area and put them to work building barricades with the debris in the hall.
Haller ran up as the work began.
“Something’s going on,” he told Corbec. “Got no vox, but word of mouth
says the enemy is falling back all over.”
Corbec scratched his head. “Damned if I know what this is about.”
“Colm?”
Corbec looked round. Mkoll was approaching now. Some of his squad
came up behind, battered and bleeding like the rest of them, escorting a
figure.
It was Soric.
“He… he demands to talk to you,” said Mkoll.
“Agun’s never had to ask for my ear in his life, Mkoll. He won’t start now
either.”
Corbec walked over to Soric. The old Verghastite was shaking and
exhausted.
“You have to warn Gaunt.”
“Warn him?”
“It’s not over.”
“I’ll not argue with you, Agun. Something fishes going on but I d—”
“No, Colm!” Soric pulled a brass message shell out of his pocket and
opened it. “The nine. The nine are not finished. The psykers—”
Corbec smiled. “I killed the psykers, Agun. Pater Sin and his two freaks. I
sent them to hell.”
Soric swallowed. “I know you did. It told me.”
“What did?”
“Doesn’t matter. Colm, they’d already imprinted their task. That’s what
they were for. Not to kill the Beati like the others, but to choose and direct a
killer who would do it for them. Someone close to her. And he’s still out
there.”
Corbec’s eyes widened. “Feth… What? Who?”
“It showed me everything, Colm. It showed me what he was,” he said,
holding out the ragged sheet of blue paper for Corbec to see.
Milo put his arm around the Beati’s shoulders and led her across the
concourse. She was shaking with exhaustion, and deep slashes from
Innokenti’s blade were bleeding freely.
“Medic! Medic here!” he called.
The enemy had gone, in rapid retreat, their morale broken as much by the
death of their overlord as by the victory of the Beati. Even now, the fleeing
enemy forces were engaging with the pilgrim army in the high town as they
tried to break off.
It was not over. Indeed, the fight for Herodor was a long way from done.
But for now, the looming defeat was postponed.
The ruined concourse, adrift with smoke and crackling fires, was littered
with the dead of both sides. Men picked their way through the rubble, looking
for the wounded, for fallen comrades. Where they found the enemy alive, they
were merciless.
Dorden led a gaggle of medic teams out into the battlefield.
“Here!” Milo called, and Dorden came running over.
Gaunt and other officers stood warily by as Dorden treated the Beati’s
wounds. “Can we get vox?” he asked Beltayn.
“It’s all out, sir. The death scream of the enemy leader fried every circuit.”
Gaunt turned to the men around him. “We’ve done a great thing this day.
We’ve pulled back from a brink I was sure we would topple over. We have
struck a great blow at the archenemy of mankind. Gather your units, see to the
wounded, and spread this word, by mouth, to all you meet. The Beati is
triumphant. Innokenti is dead. Make sure everyone knows it. Make sure every
last damn citizen in the hives knows it.”
The officers nodded and spread out.
“I need to get her to an infirmary where there’s power,” Dorden said.
“And I’ll need a stretcher…”
“I can walk,” said Sabbat, rising.
“Then we’ll walk with you,” said Gaunt. “Honour guard, here!”
Milo stepped up, as well as Daur and Derin. Nessa also took a step
forward. Gaunt nodded.
Larkin, sat wearily against a wall nearby, got to his feet.
“Me too, sir,” he said.
Gaunt looked at him. “Any special reason, Larks?”
Larkin gestured at the Ghosts around the Beati. “They were the honour
guard. On Hagia. The ones she called.”
Gaunt looked and realised the old sniper was right. Dorden, Daur, Nessa,
Milo and Derin had all been part of Corbec’s inspired mission on the
Shrineworld. Apart from Corbec himself, the only ones missing were the
ones no longer alive. Greer, Vamberfeld and Bragg.
“Try would’ve wanted me to fill in for him,” Larkin said. “It mattered to
him. She mattered. I… I can see why now.”
“Carry on,” said Gaunt.
Using lamp packs to light their way, and moving slowly, the escort left the
Great Concourse and headed down the connective hallways towards the main
stairwell. They walked through abandoned hive streets littered by warfare
and looting. Terrified and stunned civilians huddled in the ruins and watched
them pass by, bowing at the sight of the Saint.
Edgy, Gaunt walked with them, desperate for the vox to come back so he
could get a picture of the situation. He’d have to trust Rawne and Udol to get
things solid without him.
They were clearing another hallway, close to the access shafts, when
Gaunt saw a flash of torchlight and heard a voice calling his name.
Panting hard, Corbec ran up, followed by Soric.
“What’s he doing here?” Gaunt asked.
“His duty,” said Corbec. “There’s a killer out there still. One of the nine.”
“What?”
“The psyker’s imprinted someone,” Corbec said. “Someone suitable.” He
held out the rag of blue paper to Gaunt.
“Get her in cover!” Gaunt yelled and raised his lamp to read the scrap as
Dorden and the honour guard hurried the Beati towards shelter. Nessa and
Larkin immediately raised their long-lases and started to scan for trouble
through their scopes.
“No…” Gaunt said, reading the name on the paper. He swung round.
“Milo! Get h—”
A las-shot seared out of the darkness around them and hit the wall
centimetres from the Beati’s head.
Everyone dropped. Another two shots zapped at them. One hit Derin in the
shoulder and threw him off his feet.
“I can’t see him!” Larkin moaned, training his weapon.
Two more shots whined in. Nessa tried a return, and banged a hot-shot into
the darkness. The killer’s reply, a semi-auto flurry, hit Daur in the hip and
slammed Dorden over against the wall.
“He’s all over us!” Corbec yelled, down in cover beside Gaunt. “Did you
see Soric’s note? Did you read what he did?”
Fury boiled through Ibram Gaunt. Soric’s talent had not only identified the
killer imprinted by Sin’s psykers, it had exposed him for all he was. Soric
had seen into the hateful mind of a stone killer and revealed all his crimes.
Lijah Cuu. Murderer. Rapist. Killer of Bragg. Killer of Sehra Muril.
Corbec held out his laspistol to Gaunt.
“On three?” he suggested.
Gaunt looked back at the beleaguered escort. Daur and Derin were both
writhing in pain. Dorden was lying on the ground and looked like he was
dead. Nessa was pumping his chest frantically. Milo and Larkin, weapons
raised, were shielding the Beati with their bodies.
“Get ready to move her!” Gaunt yelled.
He and Corbec leapt up and charged, firing into the dark. The laspistol
cracked in Gaunt’s hand, spitting bars of light into the shadows. Corbec was
beside him, spraying auto-fire from his lasrifle.
A flurry of shots burned back at them.
Gaunt leapt over a scatter of fallen wall stones and darted along the far
wall. He fired into the shadows. “Cuu! Cuu, you bastard! I will have you!”
A las-round hit Gaunt in the back and threw him hard onto his face. He felt
the hot rush of blood leaking out of him. He tried to turn.
“You first, sure as sure, then the bitch Beati,” Cuu said, kneeling on
Gaunt’s back and making him yell with pain. “I’ll kill you all.”
The straight silver came down to Gaunt’s throat.
The hot-shot was so loud the noise of it rolled up and back down the
hallway. Gaunt felt Cuu’s deadweight slam down across him. He struggled
out from under Cuu’s body. Larkin bent down and dragged him up.
Gaunt swayed. The wound in his back was agonising. He gazed down at
Cuu’s ruined corpse.
“Never did like him,” Larkin said.
“He killed Bragg.”
“I know, sir,” Larkin said.
“Good shot. In the dark like that.”
“I just fething wish I could have got a bead on him sooner,” said Larkin.
His voice was low, as if strained by massive emotion.
“What do you mean?” Gaunt asked. He stirred up and looked back down
the hall. Pain flared through his back, but what he saw hurt him so much
more.
Twenty metres back down the hall, face down in a pool of blood, Colm
Corbec lay dead.
EPILOGUE
The battle for Herodor lasted another six weeks. The vast invasion force fell
back after Innokenti’s death, harried and harassed by the militant pilgrim
army. Two days later, renewed and using its strengths to the, full, it reassaulted
the Civitas. Thousands of pilgrims perished in the resistance The
Beati, limping from her wounds, led the counter push with the remnants of the
Imperial strength — Ghosts, Regiment Civitas, PDF and the pilgrim host —
and kept the massive force at bay for a week.
Then the reinforcement fleet arrived, sent by the Warmaster. The initial
fleet engagement lit up the night sky. A far greater and more bloody combat
than is recorded in this account then took place. Over a period of weeks, the
Magister’s forces were driven out of the Civitas, and extinguished in a final
pitched land battle in the Stove Hills.
The Tanith Ghosts played no part in that.
Nor did they play a part in the overall victory. Freed from their obligations at
Morlond and the front, large segments of the Crusade force were loosed to
defend the Khan flank. The details of those actions is recorded in other
works. It is sufficient to point out that had the Magister’s warhost not been so
detained with the business of Herodor, the entire Khan Group would most
likely have fallen, and the Crusade efforts been lost.
The Beati’s efforts had been emphatic. She had forced the flank attack to
be stillborn, and furthermore she had killed one of Gaur’s most senior
lieutenants. The message sent to the enemy was devastating. As the Archon’s
forces tumbled back into the edge systems of the Sabbat Worlds, Macaroth
prepared for the final, triumphant era of the Crusade.
As history records, it would not be easy. But for the while, the advantage
was entirely his.
Gaunt turned his face away from the stinging dust as the lander came in. It
settled on the roofpad of Old Hive, and the thrusters died.
He turned to face the Beati and knelt. She lifted him up again with both
hands.
“Not to me,” she said. “I should kneel to you.”
“Do you know where they’re sending you?” Gaunt asked.
“The front line. Carcaradon. To Macaroth’s side… as Lugo kept advising.”
Gaunt smiled. “You knew better.”
“Now, he’s right. I will not forget the service of the Ghosts, Ibram.”
“Just do me a favour and look after him.”
She smiled and nodded. “His destiny awaits us, Ibram Gaunt. It is more
than you could possibly imagine.”
She kissed Gaunt’s forehead and walked away towards the open ramp of
the lander. Gaunt looked at Milo. He seemed happy and terrified, all at once.
He ran over to Gaunt as if to hug him and then, at the last minute, stopped and
threw a hard salute.
Gaunt returned the salute. Then he drew his warknife and handed it to
Milo.
“You lost yours. Take mine with you now.”
Milo looked at the straight silver in his hands for a moment and then ran to
join Sabbat. The lander’s ramp closed, and it lifted away into the colourless
sky on a roar of jets.
“Goodbye, Brin,” Gaunt said, certain he would never see the boy again.
The shuttle from the black ship was waiting. Ominous men in long dark robes
paced about the platform. He could smell the ozone stink of power-goads.
His hands shook in their cuffs.
A black-robed figure strode down the landing ramp, glanced at a data-slate
offered by a servitor, and walked towards him.
“Name?”
“Agun S—”
A power-goad lashed him into silence.
“His name is Agun Soric,” said the man standing beside him.
“Evaluation?”
“Psyker, level beta.”
The black robed figure nodded. “Sign the release, please.”
Viktor Hark took hold of the data-slate with his newly implanted augmetic
limb and studied it. He put his signature on the plate with the stylus and
handed the slate back to the inquisitor. “Where are you taking him?” Hark
asked.
“Where he belongs. It’s no concern of yours,” said the robed inquisitor.
“Advance him!” he yelled, and the handlers goaded the shackled Soric up the
ramp.
Hark could hear Soric sobbing. He turned away, shutting it out.
A brass message shell sat on the deck grille at his feet. Hark leaned down
and picked it up in his augmetic hand. He opened it and knocked out the
paper.
Two words were written on the blue scrap.
Help me.
Hark turned back and watched as the shuttle lifted off and swung up and
away into the sky.
The saw was shrilling. The lovely whine of good wood splitting. The air
was thick with aromatic dust.
Colm Corbec walked into the little woodshop off Guild Slope and
watched for a while as the old man — what was his name again… Wyze?—
worked the wood. Business had been brisk. Feth, yes! Coffins for the
departed. God-Emperor, that was supply and demand!
Corbec stepped into the pungent, dry air of the woodshop, and ran his hand
down a length of mature timber. Not nalwood, but good.
This Wyze He was all on his own, without any assistance. Not the way
Corbec’s father would have run it. He needed a hand.
Corbec rolled up his sleeves. He knew this work. He liked it. He’d stay
awhile and help out.
“No other wood will do. You understand?”
“Yes, Mister Gaunt,” said Guffrey Wyze.
“That’s Colonel-commissar—” Gaunt began and then shook his head.
“Nalwood. All of it.”
“It’s your money, sir. Friend of yours, was it?”
“Friend. Brother. Ghost,” said Gaunt.
Wyze smiled. “Plenty of them hereabouts.”


